<!-- image -->

mKm&amp;$$M$&amp;

$S$£$^&amp;v  &gt;&lt;-X^;

888

;&lt;&lt;;&lt;:

an

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Digitized by the Internet Archive in 2007 with funding from Microsoft Corporation

A     POLITICAL    HISTORY    OF CONTEMPORARY  EUROPE SINCE  1814

## A   GREAT  PEACEMAKER

The  Diary  of  James  Gallatin,  Secretary  to   Albert Gallatin,  1813-1827.  Illustrated.  Demy  8vo.  10s.   net.

James  Gallatin  was  the   son  and  private  secretary  of   Albert  Gallatin,  the maker  of   the   Peace  of   Ghent,  concluded  in   December,  1814.   This   diary describes  the   mission  of   Albert  Gallatin  to   Europe   in   the   interest  of   Peace, his   negotiations  during   two  years   in   London  and   St.   Petersburg,  and finally   in   Ghent.

## THE  GREATNESS  AND DECLINE  OF  ROME

By   GUGLIELMO  FERRERO.   5   Volumes.    Demy  8vo. 6s.   net  each.

VOL.      I.   THE  EMPIRE  BUILDERS.     450-59  B.C.

VOL.    II.  JULIUS  C^SAR.    58-44  B.C.

VOL.  III.  THE  FALL  OF  AN  ARISTOCRACY.    44-37  B.C.

VOL.  IV.  ROME  AND  EGYPT.     37-22  B.C.

VOL.    V.  THE  REPUBLIC  OF  AUGUSTUS.

21  B.C.-A.D.  14.

The   author's  object   has   been   to   give   a   complete  and   coloured  representation of   the   life   and   society   of   Csesar's  Age;   not   to   confine  his   attention merely   to   the   generals   and   politicians  "   who   crowd  so   insistently  before  the footlights  of   history,"  but   to   familiarize  the   reader  with   all   the   many   and varied  aspects  of   the   Rome  of   that   day.

LONDON:    WILLIAM  HEINEMANN

## A   POLITICAL  HISTORY  OF CONTEMPORARY  EUROPE

SINGE    1814

TRANSLATED     FROM     THE     FRENCH     OF

CHARLES    SEIGNOBOS

OF   THE  UNIVERSITY  OF   PARIS

CROWNED  BY  VAC  AD  EM  IE  FRAN$AISE

POPULAR  EDITION

<!-- image -->

LONDON WILLIAM     HEINEMANN

<!-- image -->

First   published  (z   vols.\   January,  1901 Reissued  (i   vol.),   August,  1904 Popular  Edition,  January,   1915

## PREFACE.

IN   publishing  a  contemporary  history  of   Europe  in   compact form,   I   feel   obliged   to   justify   an  enterprise  so  palpably   rash.

I   shall   not  stop   to   point   out  the   advantage  of   presenting  in a   sketch  the   history   necessary  to   a   better  understanding  of   the world  in   which  we   live.  The   question  is,   not  whether  this   history be   worth  reading,  but   whether  it   can   be   written.  I   shall,   therefore, frankly   set   forth   the   difficulties  of   the   task,   the   solutions  or expedients  which  I   have  adopted,  and   the   sacrifices  which  I   have been  obliged  to   make.  I   hope   thus  to   show  why   this   bold  attempt has   seemed  to   me  practicable,  on  condition  that   I   yield   to practical  necessities  ;   also   to   show   how   these   necessities  have   controlled the   object,   the   method,  and   the   plan   of   this   work.

The  greatest  obstacle  to  the  writing  of   the   history  of   the nineteenth  century  is   the   overwhelming  supply  of   materials. The  rigorous  historical  method  demands  the  direct  study of  the  sources.  Now  the  life  of  one  man  would  not be   long   enough - I   do   not  say   to  study   or  to  criticise - but to   read  the   official  documents  of   even  a  single   country  of Europe.  It   is   therefore,  in   the   nature  of   things,   impossible  to write  a  contemporary  history  of   Europe  that  shall  conform  to scientific  principles.  So   the  professional  historians,  judging their  method  to   be   inapplicable  to   the   study   of   the   nineteenth century,  have  abstained  from  dealing  with  this  period.  And so   the   reading  public   is   ignorant  of   contemporary  history   because the   learned  have   too   copious   means  of   learning   it.

It   has   seemed  to   me  possible  to   relax  the   rigour   of   critical method,  and  to   substitute  for   direct  study   of   the   documents  a procedure,  less   perfect   logically,  but   more  practicable  and   at   the same  time  sufficient  for   attaining  a   part   at   least   of   true   history. All   the   facts   of   the   political   history   of   our  own  times  have   been set   forth  in   monographs,  special   histories,  and  annual  publications, all   made  at   first   hand.  The   extracts  and   analyses  given   in these  works  suffice  to   exhibit  the   facts  with   sufficient  clearness  to enable  us   to   dispense   ordinarily  with   a   study   of   the   original   docu-

ment.  The  exactness  and  authenticity  of   contemporary  documents lessen   greatly   the   need   of   criticism.  Finally   the   similarity of   the   works  written  in   different  countries  on   the   same  questions, renders  control  easy  - on  condition  of   bringing  to   the choice  and  study   of   these  works  the   severe  criticism  that   one would  apply   to   the   sources.

The  second  difficulty  for   the   historian  is   the   impossibility  of citing   his   evidences.  It   is   a   very  essential  rule   of   the   historical method  that   every  statement  be   supported  by   reference  to   the sources  on  which  it   rests.  Now  in   contemporary  history  the number  of   documents  is   such  that   the   regular   method  of   citation has   to   be   abandoned.  But   this   sacrifice  too   is   excusable.  The general  facts  emerge  from  the   reading  of   the   documents  with   so great  clearness  and  certainty,  that  it   is   sufficient  to   indicate  the works  in   which  the   proofs   are  given.  I   have  therefore  thought myself  justified  in   omitting  references  at   the   foot   of   each  page and   in   confining  myself   to   a   critical  bibliography  at   the   end   of   the chapters.

In   the   bibliography  also   I   have   had   to   adopt   a   practical   device instead  of   the   regular   method.  A   bibliography  of   contemporary history,   made  according  to   the   rules  of   erudition,  would  fill   a   volume. I   have  had   to   confine  myself   to   what  is   indispensable.  My rule  has   been  to   name  only   those  bibliographies  and  general histories  which  serve  as  guides   to   the   detailed  works,  the   great collections  of   documents  and  the  most  trustworthy  and  convenient monographs  on  every  question,  so   that   the   reader  might test  my   statements  by   recurring  to   the   works  on  which  I   have relied.

This  summary  method  of   reading  and   citation  compelled  me  to restrict  my   narrative  to   the   general   facts  of   political  life,   known to   all   concerned  and   admitted  without  dispute.  But  it   is   just these  undisputed  facts  which  constitute  the   matter  of   political history.  So   I   have   not  tried  to   establish  any   disputed  fact,   nor to   discover  any  unknown  one.  It   is   by   bringing  together  the general  facts  already  known,  but   remaining  scattered,  that  new conclusions  have,   as   I   think,   been   reached.

By   confining  myself   to   setting   forth  results  that   nobody   would dream  of   disputing,  I   have   had   to   deny   myself   all   erudite  research and   all   discussion  of   particular  facts   subject   to   controversy,  for   I should  have  had   to   advance  statements  whereof  I   could  not   find space  to   give   the   proofs.  I   have   had,   then,   to   renounce  not  only all   argument  and   discussion  of   other  works,   but   also   all   attempts

at   full   narrative,  all   descriptions,  character-sketches,  and   anecdotes- such   things   being   nearly   always  matters  of   dispute. From  this   rule   I   have   departed  only   in   the   case  of   certain  transactions which   had   great   consequences.  Even  in   these  cases  I have  told   only   the   decisive  episodes,  as   to   which  there  is   no  conflict of   testimony  in   the   authorities.

Having  thus  cut  myself  off   from  all   chance  for   literary  display and   the   use  of   learned  apparatus,  I   have  avoided the   two  kinds  of   histories  to  which  the   historians  have  accustomed the   public  - the   narrative  history   and   the   erudite  history. My   aim  has  been  to  enable  my  readers  to  comprehend the   essential  phenomena  of   the   political  life   of   Europe  in   the nineteenth  century  by   explaining  the   organization  of   the   nations, governments,  and  parties,  the  political  questions  which  have arisen  in   the   course  of   the   century,  and   the   solutions  they   have received.  I   have  tried  to   write  an  explanatory  history. customed

The  date  for   beginning  fixes  itself  readily;  it   is   the   year 1814  - the   year  of   the   general   restoration  of   the   old   governments of   Europe.  As   to   the   date   for   closing,   I   have   purposely  avoided the   adoption  of   any,   in   order  to   reserve  the   right   of   following  the development  of   political  life   into   the   most  recent  events.

The  task  in   hand,   then,   is   to   explain   the   political   transformations of   contemporary  Europe  during  this  period   of   eighty   years. Being  unable  to   deal  with  the   whole  movement  of   European civilization  within  the   period,   I   have  purposely  confined  myself to   the   political   history.  I   have  avoided  all   social  phenomena that   have   had   no   direct  effect  on  political   life :   art,   science,  literature, religion,   private   manners,  and   customs.  I   have  sought chiefly   to   make  clear  the   formation,  composition,  tactics,  and policies  of   the   parties,   as   being   the   capital   facts   determining  the fate   of   institutions.  But   I   have  not  thought  it   possible  to   limit political  history   to   an  account  of   strictly   political   events  and   institutions. Aiming   above   all   to   explain   the   phenomena  by   showing how   they   are  connected  with  each  other,   I   have  reserved room  for   some  non-political  facts:  local  administration,  the   army, the   church,  the   schools,  the   press,  political  theories,  economic systems - in   all   cases  in   which  they   have  reacted  on  political  life.

Having  settled  the   choice  of   facts,   it   remained  to   classify   them. Here  comes  another  difficulty  of   contemporary  history.  There are  three  possible  orders  of   proceeding:  1st,   the   logical   order, which  consists  in   analyzing  the   political  organization  of   European states,   studying   it   as  a   whole  in   all   the   states,  taking   sue-

cessively  each  of   the   institutions  (central  government,  army, finances,  justice,   etc.);   2d,   the   chronological  order  which  consists in   dividing  the   whole  into   periods,  treating  each  period   in   succession; 3d,   the   geographical  order,   which  takes  up   one  country at   a   time   and   finishes  its   history   before  passing   to   another.

The  logical   order  is   best   for   bringing  out  the   features  common to   all   the   nations  and   the   features  peculiar   to   each.  The   chronological order   is   most  convenient  for   presenting  transactions  common to   several  countries  and   the   reciprocal  action  of   state  on state.  The  geographical  order  gives   opportunity  to  explain more  clearly   the   political  organization  and  special  evolution  of each  people;  for   in   contemporary  Europe  each  country  coincides with  a  society   subject   to   the   same  political  system  and   worked upon   by   the   same  causes. mon

Thus  each  of   the   three  methods  has   advantages  for   treating one  of   the   aspects  of   contemporary  evolution:  if   I   adopted  one of   them,   to   the   exclusion  of   the   others,  I   should  run  a   risk   of falling   into   confusion  in   parts   of   my   undertaking.  I   have  therefore used   all   three   methods  successively,  grouping  the   facts  of contemporary  history  in   three  successive  parts.

The  first   part   is   taken  up   with   the   domestic  political  history of   the   European  states;  in   this   I   follow  the   geographical  order. After  a   summary  description  of   Europe  in   1814,   as   fashioned  by the   territorial  restorations  of   the   Congress  of   Vienna,  I   study separately  and   successively  the   internal  history   of   each  state.  I have  arranged  the   countries  roughly  in   the   order  of   seniority  in the   development  of   public   life.  At   the   head  I   have   placed   England, which   furnished  the   model  of   political  organization  for   all Europe;  then  France  and  her   most  advanced  neighbours,  the Netherlands  and   Switzerland;  then  the   Iberian  countries;  following these   the   states  of   central  Europe,   Italy,   Germany,  and   Austria, and   the   Scandinavian  countries;  finally   the   group  of   eastern states,  Ottoman  and  Russian,  which  have  longest  retained  the political  forms  of   the   eighteenth  century.  This  part   takes  the natural  form  of   a   series  of   national  histories,  placed   side   by   side but   wholly   independent  of   each  other.

In   the   second  part,   constructed  according  to   the   logical   order, I   have   grouped  certain  political  phenomena  common  to   various European  communities;  I   have  considered  them  apart   from  the evolution  of   each   people  in   order  to   bring   out  their  universal character.  The  matters  treated  in   this  part   are  the   changes  in the   material  conditions  of   political  life   and   the   action  of   parties

that   are  not   limited  by   national  boundaries - the   Catholics  and the   revolutionary  Socialists.

The  third  part   is   given   up   to   the   external  relations  between the   states.  Here  the   facts  are  presented  by   periods,  following  the chronological  order.  Each  period  is   marked  by   the   preponderance of   one  of   the   great   powers - Austria,  England,  Russia, France,  Germany.  The  aim  has  been,  not  to  relate  the   diplomatic and   military   achievements  the   details  of   which  are  already familiar,  but   to   note  for   each  period   the   chief  features  of   the foreign  policy   of   the   principal  governments,  and  to   explain  the changes  in   the   relations  between  states  and   in   the   distribution  of territory  and   influence.

The  question  of   style   has   been  for   me  a   matter  of   some  concern. The   work   being   intended  as  a   scientific  manual,  its   language needed  to   be   brief,   clear,   and   exact.  Practical  necessity compelled  me  to   aim   above  all   at   brevity, - sometimes,  I   fear,   to the   point   of   obscurity, - but   I   have  never  sacrificed  clearness  to elegance.  Whenever  a  word  already  used  appeared  to  me  to make  the   phrase   clearer,  I   have  never  hesitated  to   repeat   it.   As between  two  terms  I   have  always  chosen  the   most  familiar  as being   the   easiest  to   understand  ; I   have   avoided  metaphors  which dazzle  without  enlightening.  Much  time  has   been  spent   in   seeking the   expression  that   seemed  likely   to   call   for   least   effort   on   the part   of   the   reader.

Precision  has   been  harder  to   attain.  History  is   still   so  rudimentary a   science - if   a   science  it   may   be   called - that   it   has   no vocabulary  of   technical  terms.  To  designate  political  phenomena, the   historians  have   borrowed  from  the   vocabulary  of jurists   and   philosophers  abstract  terms  which  have  now  become part   of   the   language  of   history.  These  terms  have  but   vague notions  to   rest  on,  owing   to   our   ignorance  of   the   real   nature  of political  phenomena;  but   they   give   the   vagueness  an  appearance of   technical  precision.  It   has   seemed  to   me  more  straightforward to   give   the   popular   name  to   popular   notions.  So   I   have  avoided abstract  nouns - such  as  royalty,  the   Church,  elements,  tendencies- which  so  easily   come  to   seem  mystic   forces.  When  I   have had   to   describe  the   acts  or   ideas  of   groups  of   men,   I   have   always designated  the   group  either  by   its   national,  party,  or  class  name, or   by   a   collective  noun, - such   as  government,  ministry,  clergy, so  that  the   reader  may   be   able  to   discover,  behind  this   name, the   men  who  have  acted  or  thought.

As   regards  impartiality  in   political  and  national  questions,  I

shall  not   do   my   readers  and   myself   the   wrong  of   claiming  as   a merit  that   which  is   the   duty   of   every   historian.  Having   adopted the   tone  of   a   scientific  treatise,  I   have   had   no  occasion  for   display of   personal  feelings  toward  any  party   or  nation.  I   have   indeed a   preference  for   a   liberal,  unclerical,  democratic,  Western government;  but  I   have  a   conscience  too,  and   it   has   saved  me, as   I   think,   from   the   temptation  to   distort  or   ignore   phenomena that  are  personally  distasteful  to   me.  If   I   am   deceived  in   this, the   reader  is   aware  of   the   direction  in   which  it   is   possible   that   I have  had   a   leaning.

It   may   perhaps   be   thought  that   I   have  given   too   large   space to   the   short  periods   of   revolution,  to   the   detriment  of   the   long periods  of   conservation.  The  justification  is   that  I   have  tried to   write  an  explanatory  history   of   political   evolution.  Now,   conservative repose   being   the   normal  condition  of   humanity,  it   has no  need  of   explanation;  and  when  a  system  goes  on  without change,  it   is   enough   to   describe  it   once  for   all.   Revolution  being exceptional,  it   cannot  be   understood  without  a   somewhat  full account  of   the   exceptional  circumstances  that   gave  rise   to   it;   and since  it   changes  the   organization  of   society,   it   makes  a   new   description necessary.

There  is   no  general  bibliography  of   European  history.  The student  must  look  for   the   bibliographical  notices  in   the   universal bibliographies,  the   national  bibliographies,  and  the   collections of   the   bibliographies  of   periods,  a   list   of   which  is   given   in   chap, v.,   Langlois,  "   Manuel  de   Bibliographic  Historique,"  1896.

The  account  of   political  events  in   Europe  is   given   each  year in   the   form  of   annual  publications,  which  also  contain  official documents.  The  chief  of   these  are:

The  leading  collection  of   the   documents  common  to   all   Europe is   the   "   Staatsarchiv,"  published  from  time  to  time  since  1861. According  to   its   own  sub-title  "   Collection  of   official  acts   for   contemporary history,"   it   contains  official  documents,  especially  for diplomacy.*

In   English,  the   "   Annual  Register,"  which  has   appeared  since the   eighteenth  century.

In   French,  the   "   Annuaire  Historique  Universel,"  from  1818 to  1861;  "Annuaire  des  Deux-Mondes,"  from  1850   to  1870; "   L'Annee  Politique,"  since  1874.

*   The  "Staatsarchiv"  had  been  preceded  by   similar  collections: "   Archives  Diplomatiques,"  1821  ;   "   Neueste  Staatsakten,"  1825.  These do   not,   however,  form  a  continued  series.

In   German,  Schulthess,  "   Europaeischer  Geschichtskalender," since  1860,   the   most  complete  of   all.

On   the   general  contemporary  history  of   Europe  there  are  no scientific  works  except  in   German.  These  are  of   two  classes, general  histories  and   collections  of   special   histories.

The  general  histories  are:  Gervinus,  "   Geschichte  des   XIXten Jahrhunderts,"  8   vols.,   1855-56,  a   famous  literary   work  in   its   day but   unreliable,  stops   before  1830   (translated  into   French,  under the   title   "   Hist,   du   XIXe  Siecle  ").   C.   Bulle,   "   Geschichte  der Neuesten  Zeit  "   (the   1886  edition  in   four   volumes  goes  as   far   as 1885),   the   most  exact  of   the   contemporary  histories,  but   without references  to   authorities  and   without  bibliographies  and   devoted chiefly   to   external  history.   Stern,   "   Geschichte  Europas," vol.   i.,   1894,   promises  to   be   the   most  scientific  history,   but   the first   volume,  the   only   one   issued  so   far,   stops   at   1820.

There  are  two  collections  of   contemporary  histories.  The "   Staatengeschichte  der   Neuesten  Zeit  "   is   a  series  of   histories of   the   different  countries  in   several  large   volumes  (I   shall   mention each   in   the   special   bibliography  of   each   country);  this   is the   most  important  collection  for   domestic  history.

The  Oncken  collection  of   universal  history,  "   Allgemeine  Geschichte in   Einzeldarstellungen,"  contains  a   special   series  of   modern histories  since   1789,   composed  of   histories  of   special   periods or  events  (Revolution,  Restoration,  Second  Empire,  Eastern Question,  Reign   of   William  I.)  ; it   gives   special   attention  to   international affairs.  In   French  the   modern  histories  are  nothing but   school-books.*  The  Alcan  collection,  "   Bibliotheque  d'Histoire   Contemporaine,"  includes  several  histories  of   separate  countries, most   of   them   general   sketches  for   popular   use;   they   do   not form  a   complete  collection.

For  political  institutions  the   great   Marquardsen  collection, "   Handbuch  des   Oeffentlichen  Rechts  der   Gegenwart,"  since  1883 is   a   series   of   monographs  on   the   constitutional  law   of   each   of   the European  states  (unfortunately  rather  juridical  than  historical). These  will   be   mentioned  in   the   bibliography  of   each  country.

For   economic  history  the   "   Handworterbuch  der   Staatswissenschaften  "   (six   volumes  and  a  supplement,  vol.  vii,   1890-95) gives,   in   dictionary  form,  monographs  and  detailed  bibliographies.

*   I   have  thought  it   unnecessary  to  mention  the  German  school-books, such  as   Jaeger.

## CONTENTS

## PART  I.

## CHAPTER   I.

EUROPE  IN  1814.

PAGE

Fall  of   Napoleon. - The  Congress  of   Vienna. - Territorial  Settlements.-Europe   after  the   Settlements  of   1815    3

## CHAPTER   II.

## ENGLAND.

## ENGLAND    BEFORE   THE   REFORM    OF   1832.

The  Central  Government. - Local  Government. - The  Electoral  System.- The   Church. - Social  Conditions. - The  Condition  of   Ireland. The  Reform  Movement. - Radical  Agitation  and  Repressive  Laws (1816-19).- Partial  Reforms  (1820-27).- Catholic  Emancipation.- The Electoral  Reform  of   1832    12 tem.

## CHAPTER    III.

## ENGLAND  BETWEEN  THE  TWO  REFORMS  (1832-67).

New  Conditions  of  Political  Life. - Administrative  Reforms  (183340).  - The  Labour  Agitation  of  the  Trade  Unions  (1832-34). - The Chartist  Agitation  (1837-48).- The  Irish  Agitation. - The  Free-Trade Agitation.  -   Industrial  Legislation.  -   The  Irish  Crisis  (1845-48).  Period  of   Inaction  and  Democratic  Evolution  (1849-65). - The  Electoral Reform  of   1867    41

## CHAPTER   IV.

## ENGLAND   AS   A    DEMOCRACY.

Conditions  of   Political  Life. - Gladstone's  Reforms  (1868-74). Trade-union  Legislation. - The  Imperialist  Policy  of   the  Conservative Ministry  (1874-80). - Formation  of   the  Irish  Home  Rule  Party. - Struggle between  the  Liberal  Ministry  and  the  Irish  Party  (1880-85). xiii

PAGG

Electoral  Reform  (1884-85).- Disruption  of   the  Liberal  Party   (1885-86). - The  Government  of  the  Unionist  Coalition  (1886-92).- Salisbury's Irish  Policy. - General  Legislation  of   the   Unionist  Coalition  (1886-92). - Formation  of   the   Socialist  Parties  (1884-92). - The  Fourth  Gladstone Ministry  (1892-94). - The  Unionists  Return  to   Power  (1895). - Political Evolution  of   England  in   the   Nineteenth  Century    69

## CHAPTER  V.

## FRANCE.

## THE  MONARCHY  OF   THE   PROPERTY   CLASS.

The  Bourbon  Restoration. - Political  Institutions  under  the  Charter.- Conditions  of   Political  Life. - The   Hundred  Days   and  the   Second Restoration. - Results  of   the  Hundred  Days. - The  Cotinter-Revolutionary  Crisis  (1815-16). - Government  of   the  Constitutional  Party (1816-20).- Government  of   the  Right  (1820-27).- Conflict  between  the King  and  the  Chamber  (1827-30). - Revolution  of   1830. - The  Political System  of   Louis  Philippe. - Party   Struggle  in   the  Government  (183031).  - Struggle  against  Insurrections  (1831-34). - Suppression  of   the Republican  Party  (1834-35). - Formation  of   the  Communist-Socialist Party.   -   Parliamentary  Struggles  (1836-40).  -   The  Guizot  Ministry (1840-48). - The  Catholic  and  Democratic  Opposition  Parties. - Work of   the   Monarchy  of   the   Property  Classes    103

## CHAPTER  VI.

## THE   REPUBLIC   AND    THE   DEMOCRATIC    EMPIRE.

The  Revolution  of   1848. - Struggles  in   the   Provisional  Government. - The  Government  of   the  Constituent  Assembly. - The  Government of   the   Monarchical  Parties  (1849-51). - The  Conflict  between  the  President and   the   Assembly. - Establishment  of   a   Personal  Power  (1851-52). - The  Autocratic  Empire  (1852-60).- Decline  of  the  Autocratic  Regime (1860-66). - The  Liberal  Concessions  (1867-69). - The  Liberal  Empire and   the   Radical  Party   (1869-70)    155

## CHAPTER  VII.

## THE   PARLIAMENTARY  REPUBLIC.

Government  of  the  National  Defence. - Election  of   the  Assembly and  the  Commune. - Government  of  Thiers  (1871-73). - The  Government of   the   Monarchical  Parties  (1873-75). - The  Constitution  of   1875. Struggle  between  the  President  and  the  Chamber  (1876-79). - Supremacy and   Changes  of   the   Republican  Party   (1879-84). - Division  of   the

PAGE

Republican  Party  and  Reconstitution  of   the  Conservative  Party   (188487).  - The  Boulanger  Crisis  (1887-89). - The  Transformation  of  the Extreme  Parties. - New  Division  of  Parties. - Political  Evolution  of France  in   the   Nineteenth  Century    187

## CHAPTER    VIII.

## BELGIUM   AND   HOLLAND.

Formation  of   the  Kingdom  of   the  Netherlands. - Belgian  Opposition.-  Revolution  of   1830. - Founding  of   the   Kingdom  of   Belgium

229

THE   KINGDOM   OF  THE   NETHERLANDS   SINCE   1830. The  Constitution  of   1848.,  - The  Parties  since  1848. - Luxemburg.  ..   238

## THE   KINGDOM   OF   BELGIUM.

Formation  of   Parties, - Struggles  between  Catholics  and  Liberals. - The  School  Law. - Establishment  of   Universal  Suffrage 244

## CHAPTER   IX.

## SWITZERLAND.

The  Switzerland  of   1814. - Period  of   the  Restoration  (1814-30). The  Regeneration  (1829-37).- Local  Conflicts  (1837-45).- The  Sonderbund  and  the  Civil  War  (1845-47). - The  Federal  Constitution  of   1848. - Establishment  of   Direct  Popular  Legislation. - Initiative  and  Referendum in   Changing  the  Constitution. - Initiative  and  Referendum in   Ordinary  Legislation. - Federal  Constitutional  Changes. - Transformations of  the  Political  Parties  since  1848    257

## CHAPTER    X.

## SPAIN   AND    PORTUGAL.

## SPAIN.

Spain  at  the  end  of   the   Napoleonic  Wars. - Restoration  of   1814. Revolution  of  1820. - Restoration  of  1823. - War  of  the  Succession (1830-33). - The  Statute  of   1834   and  the  Constitution  of   1837. - The Carlist  War  (1834-39). - The  Military  Dictatorship  of   Espartero  and  of Narvaez  (1840-51). - The  Concordat  of   1851   and  the  Breaking  up   of Parties. - The  Liberal  Union  and  the  Revolution  of   1854. - The  Revolution of   1868.- The  Constitution  of   1869.- The  Republic  (1873-74).The  Restoration  of   1874. - The  Constitutional  Monarchy    286

## PORTUGAL.

The  Constitution  of   1826. - Struggles  between  Chartists  and  Septembrists  (1834-52).- The  Regenerators  and  the  Deficit 319

XVI  CONTENJ^S.

## CHAPTER  XI. ITALY.

PAGE

The  Restoration  in   Italy.- The  Military  Revolutions  of   1820  and 1821. - The  Revolution  of   1831.- Mazzini  and  the  Republican  Party. The  "   Risorgimento."- The  Revolutions  of   1848. - Internal  Discords. The  Reaction. - The  Constitutional  Kingdom  of   Sardinia  (1849-58). Cavour's  Policy. - Formation  of   the  Kingdom  of   Italy   (1859-60). - The Roman  Question  (1860-66). - Annexation  of   Venetia  and  Rome  (186670).- Formation  of  Parties  and  Internal  Difficulties  (1861-70). - The Consorteria  (1861-76).- Accession  of   the  Left  (1876).- The  Triple  Alliance and   Personal  Rivalries, - Crispi's  Government  (1887-96)

326

## CHAPTER   XII.

## GERMANY.

## GERMANY   BEFORE   THE   UNION.

Germany  in  1814. - Formation  of  the  Germanic  Con  eueration (1815). - The  Individual  Governments  and  Constitutions. - Parties  in Germany. - University  Persecution. - The  Opposition  of   the  Constitutional States   of   the   South. - Movements  of   1830. - The  National  Movement since   1840. - The  Revolution  of   1848   in   Germany. - The  Frankfort Parliament. - The  Prussian  Union. - German  Reaction    374

## CHAPTER    XIII.

## THE  AUSTRIAN  EMPIRE  UNDER  THE  ABSOLUTIST  SYSTEM.

The  Austrian  Empire  in  1814.   -   Metternich's  System.  -  National Opposition  in  Hungary. - National  Opposition  by   the  Slavs. - Liberal German  Opposition,  -   The  Revolution  of  1848.   -   The  Revolution  in Hungary. - The  Revolution  in   the  Slav  Countries. - The  Civil  War  and the   Repression.- The  Hungarian  War. - The  Absolutist  Restoration  of 1849. - The  Concordat  of   1855    401

## CHAPTER  XIV.

## THE  KINGDOM  OF  PRUSSIA  BEFORE  WILLIAM  I.

Prussian  Reforms  during  the  Wars  of   Napoleon.  -   Political  Life  in Prussia.  -The  Absolutist  Reforms  (1814-23).  -   Creation  of  the  Provincial Estates  (1815-25).  -End  of   Frederick  William  III.'s  Reign.Opening  Years  of  Frederick  William  IV. 's  Reign  (1840-47).  -  The United  Landtag  of   1847.- Revolution  of   1848.- The  National  Assembly.The  Constitution  of   1850. - The  Reaction  (1850-59). - Prussia's  German Policy.- The  Zollverein     424

## CHAPTER   XV.

## ESTABLISHMENT   OF   GERMAN   UNITY.

PAGE

Reform  of   the  Prussian  Army  (1859-62). - Formation  of   the  Progress Party   (1861-62). - The  Conflict  Regarding  the  Constitution  (1862 66). - The  National-Liberal  Agitation  in   Germany  (1859-64). - Crisis  of Xhe  Duchies  (1864-66). - Dissolution  of   the  Confederation  (1866). - Annexations by   Prussia. - Formation  of   the  North  German  Confederation (1866-67). - Transformation  of   the  Parties  (1866-70). - Southern Germany. - Foundation  of   the  Empire  (1870-71)     456 ress nexations

## CHAPTER    XVI.

## THE   GERMAN    EMPIRE.

Parties  in   the  Empire. - Conditions  of   Political  Life. - The  Culturkampf  and  the  Organization  of  the  Empire  (1871-77). - Struggle against  the  Socialists  (1878). - Bismarck's  Economic  and  Social  Policy (1878-86).- The  Army  Law  and  the  "Cartel"  (1886-88).- William  II. and  Christian  Socialism. - The  "   New  Course." - Alsace-Lorraine. Political  Development  of   Germany  in   the  Nineteenth  Century

## CHAPTER   XVII.

## THE   CONSTITUTIONAL   SYSTEM   IN  AUSTRIA.

## FORMATION   OF   AUSTRO-HUNGARY.

The  Constitution  of   October  1860. - The  Constitution  of   1861. - Attempt at   a   Unitary  Government  (1861-65). - Suspension  of  the  Constitution.-  The   Hungarian  Compromise. - The  Liberal  Constitutions  of tempt

1867    518

## AUSTRIA-HUNGARY

Conditions  of  Political  Life  in   Austria. - Political  and  National Parties.- The  Liberal  Ministry  (1867-70).- Attempt  at  a   Federalist Constitution  (1870-71). - Electoral  Reform  and  Constitutionalist  Ministries (1871-78). -  Parties  and  Politics  in   Hungary  (1867-78). - Crisis  of the  Occupation  of  Bosnia  (1878). - Federalist  Policy  of  the  Taaffe Ministry  (1879-93). - German-Polish  Coalition  and  Electoral  Reform  of 1896. - Political  Struggles  in   Hungary  since  1878.   -   Political  Evolution of   Austria-Hungary  in   the   Nineteenth  Century     529

485

## xviii  CONTENTS.

## CHAPTER  XVIII.

## THE    SCANDINAVIAN   COUNTRIES.

| Formation of the Scandinavian States                                          | PAGE 554   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------|
| SWEDEN.                                                                       | SWEDEN.    |
| Transformation of the Swedish Constitution. - Swedish Parties.. . .           | 556        |
| NORWAY.                                                                       | NORWAY.    |
| The Democratic Party.- The Constitutional Conflict. - The Na- tional Conflict | 559        |

## DENMARK  AND  THE  DUCHIES.

The  Danish  Monarchy  before  the  Separation  of   the  Duchies. - The Duchies  of  Schleswig-Holstein.- The  Wars  of  the  Duchies.- The Cession  of   the  Duchies. - The  Constitution  of  1866. - The  Constitutional Conflict  (1873-94).- Iceland     566

## CHAPTER   XIX.

## THE   RUSSIAN  -EMPIRE    AND    POLAND.

The  Russian  Empire  in   1814. - The  Government  of   Alexander  I.  Finland  and  the  Constitutional  Kingdom  of   Poland. - The  Insurrection of   December,  1825.- The  Polish  Insurrection  (1830-32). - The  Empire under  Nicholas  (1825-35). - Liberal  Reaction  against  the  "   Nicholas System." - The  Emancipation  of   the  Serfs  (1858-63). - Alexander II. 's   Liberal  Reforms. - The  Polish  Insurrection  of   1863. - Repression of   the   Polish  National  Movement. - Return  to   Absolutism  in   Russia. The  Opposition  Parties. - Alexander  III.'s  Reign. - Russification. Tsar  Nicholas  II    578

## CHAPTER   XX. THE   OTTOMAN    EMPIRE.

The  Ottoman  Empire  in   1814. - Crisis  of   the  Greek  Insurrection (1820-27). - Mahmoud's  Reforms  (1826-38). - Crisis  of  Egyptian  Conflicts (1833-40). - The   Reforms  of   Reschid  Pasha  (1838-50). - Period  of the   Crimean  War  (1852-59).  -Attempts  at   Reform,  Fuad  and  AH  (185971).  - Financial  Crisis  and  Young  Turkey  (1871-76). - Russian  Invasion, Crisis  and   Dismemberment  (1877-78). - Personal  Government  of Abdul-Hamid.  .  .     .616

## CONTENTS.  xix

## CHAPTER  XXI.

## THE   CHRISTIAN    NATIONS   OF   THE    BALKANS.

Christian  Nations  of   the  Ottoman  Empire  in   1814

PACK

638

## ROUMANIA.

The  Principalities  of   Moldavia  and  Wallachia  up   to  1856. - Formation of   the   State  of   Roumania  (1856-66). - The  Constitutional  Monarchy  640 archy

## GREECE.

The  Greek  Nation  before  1820. - Formation  of  the  Kingdom  of Greece  (1820-29). - The  Absolutist  System  (1829-43). - Greece  under the  Constitutional  System       648

## SERVIA   AND   MONTENEGRO.

Formation  of  the  Principality  of   Servia. - Servia  under  the  Constitutional System. - Montenegro     657

## BULGARIA.

The  Bulgarian  People  before  the  Union  of  1885. - Bulgaria  since the   Union  of   1885      664

## PART  II.

## CHAPTER  XXII.

## TRANSFORMATION   IN    THE   MATERIAL   CONDITIONS   OF POLITICAL   LIFE.

Industrial  Inventions. - New  Means  of   Destruction. - New  Methods of   Communication.  -  Transformation  in  Population.  -   Increase  in Wealth. - Transformation  in   Economic  Life    671

## CHAPTER   XXIII.

## THE   CHURCH   AND   THE  CATHOLIC    PARTIES.

The  Church  before  the  Revolution. - The  Revolution  in   the  Church. -The  Restoration  of   the  Church.- The  Ultramontane  Party.- The Liberal  Catholic  Party. - The  Catholic  Democracy  and  the  Revolution of   1848. - Reaction  in   the  Church. - The  Encyclical  "Quanta  Cura  " and  the  Syllabus  (1864). - The  Vatican  Council  (1869-70).- Conflicts between  Church  and  State.- Policy   of   Leo  XIII    684

## CHAPTER  XXIV.

## THE   INTERNATIONAL   REVOLUTIONARY   PARTIES.

PAGE

Free  Masons  and  Carbonari. - The  Republican  "Young  Europe." The  Socialistic  Schools. - The  Communist  Parties. - The  Revolutionary Parties  during  the   Revolution  of   1848   and  the   Reaction. - The   International (1862-72).- Formation  of   the   Socialist  Platform  in   Germany (1863-75).- The  Anarchist  Parties. - Formation  of   the   National  Socialist Parties.   -  Policy  of   the  Revolutionary  Parties. - The  International Socialist  Congresses    7J8

## PART  III.

## CHAPTER  XXV.

## EUROPE   UNDER   THE   METTERNICH    SYSTEM   (1815-30).

European  Questions  in   1815.- The  Holy   Alliance  (1815). - Rivalry between  Alexander  I.   and  Metternich  (1815-18). - Congress  of   Aix-laChapelle  and  Alexander's  Conversion  (1818).- Austrian  Congresses  ; the  Interventions  (1820-23). - English  Policy  under  Canning. - Intervention in   the  East  (1823-29). - Breaking  up   of   the  European  Alliance (1830)     747

## CHAPTER   XXVI.

## RIVALRY   BETWEEN^  RUSSIA   AND    ENGLAND   (1830-54).

Conditions  of   Foreign  Policy  after  1830. - Recognition  of   the  July Monarchy  (1830).  -Settlement  of  Belgium  (1830-32).  -   The  Polish Question  (1830-32). - Intervention  of  Austria  and  France  in  Italy (1831-32). - Intervention  in   Spain  and  Portugal  (1833-36). - The  Eastern Question  (1832-33). - The  Refugees  and  the  Alliance  of   the  Absolutist Monarchies  (1833). - Rupture  of   the  Alliance  between  France and  England  (1836-40). - The  Eastern  Question  and  the  Straits  Convention (1839-41). - The  "State  of  -Good  Feeling"  (1841-45).- The Spanish  Marriages  (1846).- The  Cracow  Affair  (1846).- The  Portuguese and   Italian  Affairs  (1847). - The  Swiss  Affair  (1847-48). - Revolutions of   1848. - The   Restorations  (1849). - Austria's  Triumph  over Prussia  (1850). - Recognition  of   the  French  Empire  (1852). - The  Tsar and  the   Eastern  Question  (1852-53)    ,        .,.,,,..  764 ern

xxi

## CHAPTER   XXVII.

## FRENCH    PREPONDERANCE   AND   THE   NATIONALIST  WARS (1854-70).

PAGR

PACK

Transformations  in   European  Policy. - The  Crimean  War  (1853-56). - The  Congress  of   Paris  (1856). - Napoleon's  Predominance  (1856-59). - Alliance  between  France  and  Sardinia  (1858). - The  Italian  War (1859). - Peace  with  Austria  (1859). - Annexations  and  the  Italian Question  (1860-62).- The  Polish  Affairs  (1863). - The  War  of  the Duchies  (1864). - Rupture  between  Prussia  and  Austria  (1864-66). - The War  of   1866.- Peace  of   Prague  (1866). -The  Luxemburg  Affair  (1867). - Latest  Conflict  between  France  and  Prussia  (1867-70). - Declaration of   War  (1870)    787

## CHAPTER  XXVIII.

## GERMAN   ASCENDENCY   AND  THE   ARMED    PEACE.

War  with  France  (1870-71).- Treaties  of   London  and  Frankfort (1871). - New  Conditions  of   European  Policy  since  1871. - The  Alliance of   the  Three  Emperors  (1871-76).- Eastern  Affairs  (1875-76).- The Turkish  War  (1877-78).- Peace  of   San  Stefano  and  Congress  of   Berlin (1878). - Formation  of   the  Triple  Alliance  (1879-83). - Formation  of   the Franco-Russian  Understanding. - Armed  Peace    813

## CONCLUSION.

| POLITICAL EVOLUTION OF EUROPE 834   |
|-------------------------------------|
| INDEX 849                           |

## A   POLITICAL  HISTORY OF CONTEMPORARY  EUROPE.

## PART  I.

## CHAPTER  I.

EUROPE  IN    1814.

Fall  of   Napoleon. - The  contemporary  history  of   Europe  begins with   a   European  event,  the   defeat  of   Napoleon  L,   who  had attacked  all   the   states,  overturning  their  internal  organization  or transforming  their  external  relations.

Directly  or   indirectly,  every  nation  in   Europe  felt   Napoleon's influence.  He   reigned  directly  over  the   French  Empire,  which comprised  not  only   ancient  France  and  the   countries  annexed by   the   Republic  (Belgium  and  the   Rhine  Provinces),  but   pieces of   Switzerland,  one-third  of   Italy,   the   Netherlands,  western  Germany, and   the   Illyrian   Provinces.  On   all   these  countries  he imposed  an  absolute  military  government.  He   lorded  it   over  the neighbouring  states;  the   kingdoms  of   Spain,   Naples,  Italy,   and Westphalia  he   gave  to   his  relatives;  on  the  German  states, united  in   the   Confederation  of   the   Rhine,   on   Switzerland,  and   on Denmark  he   imposed  treaties  of   offensive  and   defensive  alliance. He  had  even,  in   1812,   compelled  the   two  independent  German monarchies,  Austria  and  Prussia,  to   join   him  against  Russia. In   the   end   there   remained  outside  of   his   power  only   the   extremities of   Europe:  England,  Russia,  Sweden,  Sicily,   Portugal,  and the   Spanish  insurgents.  With  all   these  he   was  at  war.  All Europe  was  thus  divided  into  two  camps:  Napoleon  and  his enemies.

At   the   defeat  of   Napoleon,  his   whole  territorial  organization  of Europe  fell   to   pieces.  In   1813   Prussia  and   Austria  deserted  him and   joined   his   enemies.  Thus  was  formed  the   union  of   the   four great  powers,  officially  called  the   Allies  (England,  Russia,  Aus-

tria,   and   Prussia),  which  took  the   direction  of   the   war,  and   attached to   the   coalition  the   German  states  and   dispossessed  sovereigns of   Italy.  The  Allies  concentrated  their  forces  against Napoleon's  army   in   Saxony;  the   battle  of   Leipzig  gave   them   all Germany  at   one   blow.  They   then  offered  Napoleon  France  with its   territory   of   1800   (Frankfort,  November,  1813).   Subsequently their  three  armies  invaded  France,  and  their  next  offer  to   Napoleon was   the   territory   of   1790   (Chatillon,   1814).   Finally   they took  Paris  and   decided  to   dethrone  Napoleon  (March,  1814).

All   the   territories  annexed  to   France  since  1790,  and   all   the states  organized  by   Napoleon,  found-  themselves  then  without sovereigns.  The  Allies,  now  masters  of   Europe,  assumed  the right   to   dispose   of   them.  Before  quitting  France  they   decided to   hold  at   Vienna  a   general   congress  of   "   all   the   powers  which had  taken  part   in   the   war  on  either  side,"   thus  inviting  all   the states  of   Europe.  But  by   a   secret  article  the   Allies  reserved  to themselves  the  right   of   settling  the   affairs  of   "   the   countries abandoned  by   France,  and   the   arrangements  necessary  for   establishing a  permanent  equilibrium,"  and  they   outlined  a  plan   of territorial  division.  There  remained  for   the   congress  only   to register  the   decisions  of   the   Allies.

The  Congress  of   Vienna. - All   the   states  of   Europe   had   taken part   in   the   war;  all   sent  plenipotentiaries  to   Vienna.  Ninety sovereign  princes  and  fifty-three  mediatized  princes  were  represented. Such   a   large   gathering  of   diplomats  after  so  many  years of   war,  and   after  the   brilliant  victory   of   the   legitimate  governments over  revolutionary  France,  made  an  unusual  stir   in   the city   of   Vienna;  the   Austrian  government  had   established  a   committee on   entertainments;  there  was  a   continuous  round  of   receptions, parties,   and   balls.

Business  was  to   be   done  in   general  meeting.  The  Allies  had announced  the   congress  to   be   held  in   June   or   July;   later  they summoned  it   for   October  i ; finally   they   fixed  on   November  i   as the   date  for   the   "   formal  opening  of   the   congress."  It   was  to begin   with  the   submission  and  examination  of   credentials.  As a   matter  of   fact,   the   operation  never  took   p1ace,   the   congress  never was  opened.  There  was  in   truth  no  congress;  there  were  only committees  of   plenipotentiaries  who  signed   treaties  between  particular states.   These  treaties  were  eventually  brought  together in   a   single   instrument  called  the   final  act  of   the   Congress  of Vienna  (July   9,   1815).

The  great  powers  settled  the   affairs  of   Europe  and   imposed

their  will   on   the   other  states.  The   four   Allies  had   agreed   on the   main  points   as  early   as   May   30.   The   territories  to   be   disposed of   were  the   districts  taken  from  France  and   from  the   various states  created  by   Napoleon:  Belgium,  Holland,  the   left   bank of   the   Rhine,   Italy,   Germany,  and   the   Grand  Duchy   of   Warsaw. On  the   3Oth   of   May   they   settled  the   distribution  of   those  about which  there  was  no   dispute:  namely,  Italy,   Belgium,  and   the   left bank  of   the   Rhine.  The  rest,   Germany  and  Poland,  they   left over  to   the   Congress  of   Vienna.  At   Vienna,  the   plenipotentiaries of   the   four   great   powers   decided  to   come  to   an  agreement about  the   reserved  questions  first   among  themselves,  but   to   extend to   the   ambassadors  of   France  and   Spain   the   compliment  of an   invitation  to   take   part   in   the   conferences.  As   the   English   envoy said   to   Talleyrand,  the   French  envoy,  at   the   first   conference, September  30,   "   The  object   of   this   meeting  is   to   let   you   know what  the   four  powers  have  been  doing."  They   gave   him  the official  report   of   their   proceedings,  in   which  they   gave   themselves the   name  of   Allies.  Talleyrand  protested  that   this   term  shut  out France  from  any  share  in   the   concert.  He   asked  reproachfully whether  they   regarded  themselves  as  still   at   war  with  France, that   they   should  thus   agree  apart   on   terms  to   be   imposed   on   her, as   had   been   done   in   1814.

Talleyrand  thereupon  demanded  the   opening  of   the   congress according  to   the   promise  made  by   the   Allies  and   the   appointment of   a   committee  to   prepare  the   questions  which  the   congress  alone had  the   right   to   decide.  His   policy   was  to   rally   the   little   states around  France  in   order  to   oppose  the   Allies.  He   succeeded  in bringing  about  a   declaration  that  the   congress  should  open  on the   first   of   November,  with  the   amendment  "   according  to   the principles  of   public   law   "  ; his   plan   being,   by   means  of   invoking international  law   and   legitimacy  or   the   rights   of   legitimate  sovereigns, to   prevent  the   Allies  from  making  a   new  division  of   the conquered  territory.  "   The  King,"   he   said,   "   will   not  admit  that mere  conquest  can  give   sovereignty."  He  accordingly  took under  his  protection  the   legitimate  King   of   Saxony  and  refused to   recognise  Murat  as   King   of   Naples.  He   also   succeeded in   getting   the   preparatory  committee  made  up   of   representatives of   the   four   Allies  and   of   the   four   other  states  which  had   signed the   treaty   of   Paris - France,  Spain,   Portugal,  and   Sweden.  But these  formal  concessions  amounted  practically  to   nothing;  for   the congress  never  was  opened,  and  the   four  Allies  alone  made  the settlements.

Territorial  Settlements. - England  kept,  of   her  conquests, Malta,  the   Ionian  Islands,  Heligoland,  and,   outside  of   Europe, the  Cape,   Ceylon,  and  the   He   de   France.  Austria  took  the Illyrian  provinces  and   the   districts  ceded  to   Bavaria,  indemnifying Bavaria  with   the   Palatinate  on   the   left   bank  of   the   Rhine. In   this   way   England  and   Austria  were  satisfied  without  opposition. The   settlement  of   the   Netherlands  and   Italy   was  made without  discussion.  Belgium  was  united  to   Holland  to   form  the kingdom  of   the   Netherlands,  which  was  given   to   the   Prince  of Orange.  In   Italy,   Austria  added  to   the   Milanese,  Venetia  and the   Valteline;  the   King   of   Sardinia  received  the   former  republic of   Genoa;  the   rest  of   the   formerly  existing  states  were  re-established.

Poland  and  Germany  now  remained  to   be   disposed  of,   and   as to   these  the   Allies  were  divided.  The  Tsar  wished  to   keep   the whole  Grand  Duchy  of   Warsaw,  that  is   to  say,  all   Prussia's share  in   the   two  partitions  of   Poland  of   1793   and   1795.   Prussia did   not   insist   on  getting   back   her   part   of   Poland,   preferring  to   be indemnified  by   the   annexation  of   the   Kingdom  of   Saxony.  This she   alleged   might   be   regarded  as  vacant  territory,  for   it   had   been conquered  from  Napoleon's  ally,   the   King   of   Saxony,  who  had not   had   time,   like   the   other   German  princes,   to   secure  his   estates by   signing  a   treaty  with  the   Allies.  The   Tsar,   welcoming  this solution,  accused  the  King  of   Saxony  of   "   treason  to  the European  cause  "   in  accepting  the  Grand  Duchy  from Napoleon.  Prussia  and  Russia,  acting  together,  therefore proposed  to  annex  Saxony,  compensating  its  King  with vacant  territories  in   Germany.  But  to  this  scheme  England, and   especially  Austria,  could  not  agree;  it   would advance  the  Tsar  too  far  into  Europe  and  give   Prussia too  great  a  power  in  Germany.  Talleyrand,  while  pretending to   uphold   the   cause  of   the   legitimate  King   of   Saxony against   the   "   revolutionary  "   pretensions  of   Prussia,  took advantage  of   the   disagreement  between  the   Allies  to  secure  a defensive  alliance  between  England,  Austria,  and  France.  He wrote  to   the   King:   "   Now  the   coalition  is   dissolved,  and   forever  " (January,  1815).  In   reality,   his   intervention  served  only   to   plant a   Prussian  army  on  the   French  frontier.  The  Prussian  representatives would   have   preferred   to   avoid   a   direct  contact  between France  and  Prussia;  they   therefore  proposed  to  make  the  left bank  of   the   Rhine  into  a  state  for   the   King   of   Saxony.  This would  have  been  a   Catholic  state  under  a  sovereign  naturally

allied  to   France.  The  Tsar  approved  the   scheme;  the   two  other Allies  refused  it,   and   Talleyrand  helped   them  to   defeat  a  combination of   such  evident  advantage  to   France.  At   last   they   appointed a   Committee  of   Statistics  which  selected  four  pieces   of territory  to   make  up   the   indemnity  for   Prussia;  to   make  up   the 3,400,000  souls  which  were  owing   her,   they   assigned  her   first  a province  of   Poland,  Posen  (810,000  souls);   second,  the   left   bank of   the   Rhine  (1,044,000);  third,   Westphalia  (829,000);  fourth,  a part   of   the   Kingdom  of   Saxony  (782,000).  The  Tsar  kept   the rest  of   Poland  and   promised  to   make  it   into  a   kingdom  with  a constitution.

The  other  territorial  changes  were  made  by   special  treaties; Sweden  ceded  Pomerania  to   Prussia,  which  in   turn  ceded  Lauenburg   to   Denmark  in   exchange  for   Norway  joined   to   Sweden.

Before  these  arrangements  were  completed  came  the   news  of Napoleon's  return.  The  plenipotentiaries  arranged  to   declare  in the   name  of   Europe  that   "   Napoleon  Bonaparte  had   placed   himself outside  the   pale   of   civil   and   social   relations,  and   as   an  enemy and   disturber  of   the   peace  of   the   world,   had   made  himself  an  outlaw ";   they   promised  to   protect  the   King   of   France  or  any   other government  from  his  attacks  (March  13,  1815).  They   then hastened  to  prepare  "   the   final  act  of   the   congress."  It   was signed   by   the   eight   states  which  had   composed  the   "   preparatory commission,"  and  the   others  were  "   invited  to   give   in   their  adhesion." They   inserted  a   provision  for   the   free   navigation  of rivers  and   a   guarantee  of   the   neutrality  of   the   Netherlands  and Switzerland.

After  Waterloo  the   Allies  renewed  their  secret  conferences  to decide  what  pledges  they   should  take   of   France.  They   all   agreed to   demand  military  occupation,  a  money  indemnity,  and  some cessions  of   territory.  But   on  the   extent  of   these  cessions  they could  not  agree.  The  two  German  states  Prussia  and  Austria, being   more  directly   threatened,  demanded  Alsace,  and  even  Lorraine and   French  Flanders.  England  and  the   Tsar  approved only   the   restitution  of   Savoy   to   the   King   of   Sardinia  and   some rectifications  of   frontier  that  should  deprive  France  of   certain fortresses.  Austria  agreed;  the  King   of   Prussia,  left  alone, threatened,  then  yielded.  Then  the   Allies  came  to  an  understanding on   the   ultimatum  to   be   imposed   on   France  (September 20).   With  some  modifications  obtained  by   France,  this   became the   treaty  of   Paris.

At   the   same  time  the   Allies  made  a   permanent  league   "   for

the   safety   of   their   states  and   the   general   tranquillity  of   Europe." They   agreed   to   take   measures  in   common,  if   revolutionary  principles should   again   "   rend  France  and   threaten  the   quiet   of   other states." Europe  after  the   Settlements  of   1815. - The  settlements  of Vienna  had  been  made  according  to   the   diplomatic  principles  of the   eighteenth  century,  the   balance  of   power  and   the   system  of compensations.  France,  regarded  as   too  powerful,  was  reduced  to her   old   territory,  so   as   to   restore  the   equilibrium.  The   other   great powers  could  receive  only   indemnities  in   exchange  for   territories ceded  to   other  states.  But   two  great   powers  were  made  exceptions: England   kept   Malta  and   the   Ionian  Isles;   Russia  kept Bessarabia,  Finland,  and  Poland.  Both  gained  by   their  wars against   France  a   net   increase  of   territory  at   the   expense  either  of suppressed  states  (Venice  and  Malta)  or  of   old   allies  of   France (Sweden,  Turkey,  and  Poland).  Austria  and  Prussia  received only   compensations,  but   reckoned  from  their  time  of   greatest  territorial extent,   that   is,   after  the   last   partition  of   Poland.  Austria received  the   territory   of   Venice  to   make  up   for   the   loss   of her   Netherlands  and   Salzburg  to   make  up   for   the   loss   of   her   old domains  in   Swabia.  Prussia  received  in   place   of   her   Polish  regions, so   difficult  of   assimilation,  three  purely   German  districts - Westphalia,  Saxony,  and  the   Rhine  province;  in   exchange  for Lauenburg  she  gained  Swedish  Pomerania.  Both  Austria  and Prussia,  therefore,  found  themselves  with  a   territory,  if   not greater,  at   least  more  compact  than  in   1795.   The  German princes  retained  the   territories  secularized  or  mediatized  in   the time  of   Napoleon.  The  small  states  favoured  by   the   Allies  received increase  of   territory.  The   Prince  of   Orange   got   Belgium, and  the   King   of   Sardinia,  Genoa;  Switzerland,  the   Bernese  Jura and   a   fragment  of   Savoy.  These  increases  were  made  at   the   expense of   the   small  states  that   had   no  reigning  families,  the   republics of   Genoa  and  Venice,  the   ecclesiastical  states,  the   German free   cities   and   also   at   the   expense  of   two  of   Napoleon's allies,   Saxony  and  Denmark.  All  the  ecclesiastical  states  of Europe  disappeared  except  that  of   the  Pope.  The  Holy   See protested  against  this   decision  of   the   lay   diplomats  of   Vienna  as it   had   formerly  condemned  the   original  secularizations  following the   Peace  of   Luneville  in   1803. man

Thus  the   work  of   the   congress  was  not  a  simple   restoration; of   the   overturnings  of   the   revolutionary  period  the   Allies  accepted those   that   pleased   them,   those   that   injured   no   lay   prince;

and   from  the   territories  thus   left   vacant  they   carved  out  compensations and   extensions  for   themselves.  All   these  changes  were made  according  to  the   practice  of   the   eighteenth  century,  without consulting  the   inhabitants  and   with   no   thought  for   their  interests. The   diplomatists  represented  governments,  but  not peoples.

The  system  thus  established  rested,  as   in   the   eighteenth  century, on   the   balance  of   power   between  five   great   powers - two western,  France  and   England;  three  eastern,  Russia,  Austria,  and Prussia.  Neither  of   these  was  strong  enough  to   control  Europe nor  even  to   make  war  against  the   rest.  The  balance  of   power did   indeed  maintain  itself  for   a   half-century  and   the   peace  of Europe  for   forty   years.   Between  the   two  groups  was  a  central region   divided  into   small  states,  those  of   Germany  and   of Italy,   the   Netherlands  and   Switzerland,  the   two   latter  being   declared neutral   by   the   guarantee  of   the   great   powers.  The   house of   Hapsburg  controlled  the   two  regions  of   small  states - Italy through  the   Austrian  possessions,  Germany  through  the  influential position   of   the   Emperor;  and,   not  needing   extension  for herself,  she   was   interested  in   maintaining  the   small  states.  In   the east,   Russia  had   absorbed  the   territory  which  formerly  separated her   from  Europe;  of   the   old   state  of   Poland  there  remained  but Cracow,  set  up   as  an  aristocratic  republic.  Sweden,  despoiled  of Finland  and  Pomerania,  was  confined  to  the  Scandinavian  region. The   Ottoman  Empire   remained  outside  of   the   European system.

The  restoration  of   the   balance  of   power   in   Europe  brought with  it   a   restoration  of   the   old   governments.  The  states  revolutionized by   the   French  armies  were  given   back  to   their  former sovereigns  to   restore  the   old   regime.  Absolute  monarchy  became the   normal  form  of   European  government.  The  only   states where  the   sovereign  was  limited  by   a  constitution  were  the   constitutional monarchies  of   England,   France,   and   the   Netherlands, the   aristocratic  republics  united  in   the   Swiss  Confederation,  Norway, and   the   new   Kingdom  of   Poland.  All   these  constitutions still   left   the   real   power   to   a   sovereign   or   a   small   aristocracy.  But the   experience  of   the   Revolution  and   revolutionary  ideas  had,   all over  Europe,  given   to   certain  men  a   desire  for   a   more  liberal  or more  democratic  form  of   government,  and  these  political  malcontents formed   themselves  into   liberal  parties,   opposing  the   political systems   restored  in   1814.   The   distribution  of   territory   at Vienna  having  been  made  regardless  of   the   wishes  of   the   popu-

lations  concerned,  certain  states  did   not  correspond  to   nations. Three  nations,  Germany,  Italy,   and  Poland,  were  parcelled  out between  several  states.  One  single   state,   Austria,  united  several uncongenial  nations  in   an  artificial  relation.  This  system  produced malcontents  who   tended  to   form   national  parties.  The   liberal and   national  malcontents,  united  ordinarily  into  a  single opposition  party,  worked  therefore  to   undo  the   work  of   the   diplomats; and,   as   governments  arrange  for   mutual  support,  so the   oppositionists  in   each  country  felt   themselves  drawn  toward those  in   the   other  countries  and   sought   co-operation  with  them. eral

More  than  all   the   rest,   the   Austrian  government  was  interested in   checking  these  national  and  liberal  movements,  which threatened  at   once  its   interior  organization  and   its   influence  in Germany;  the   head  of   the   Austrian  government,  Metternich,  became therefore  naturally   the   leader  of   the   resistance.  He   called all   his   opponents  revolutionists  because  they   invoked  the   principles set   forth   during   the   French  Revolution,  sovereignty  of   the people,  liberty,  and  equality.  He   sums  up   the   situation  thus: "   The   object   of   these  factions  is   one  and   the   same,  the   overthrow of   every   legally  existing  institution.  .  .   The  principle which  the   monarchs  must  set  against  this  ...  is   the   preservation of   every   legally   existing  institution."  Between  the   conservative governments,  masters  of   power,  and   the   opposition parties,  liberals,  nationalists,  and   democrats,  began   in   all   countries the   struggle   which  forms  the   political   history   of   Europe   in the   nineteenth  century.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.

For   the   history   of   the   facts   treated  in   this   chapter   a   reliable  bibliography will  be   found  in   Dahlmann-Waitz,  "   Quellenkunde  der  Deutschen  Geschichte,"  6th   edit.,   revised  by   Steindorff,  1894   ;   pp.   544,   549-50. SOURCES.- The  leading  sources  are  :

ON  THE  INVASIONS.-"  Correspondance  de  Napoleon  I.,"   1858-70. W.   Oncken,  "   Oesterreich  und   Preussenim  Befreiungskriege,"  1876-79  (documents in   the   appendix).-  Metternich-Winneburg,  "   Oesterreichs  Theilnahme an   den   Befreiungskriegen,"  1887,   taken  from  Austrian  documents.

ON  THE  CONGRESS  OF   VIENNA.-  J.   L.   Kluber,  "   Akten  des  Wiener  Kongresses/'  8   vols.,   1815-35,  collection  of   official  acts.- G.   Pallain,  "   Correspondance Ined.   de   Talleyrand  et   du   Roi,"   1881,   accounts  of   the   work  of   the congress  from  the   French  point   of   view. - "   Memoirs  and  Correspondence of   Castlereagh,"  12  vols.  in   3   series,  1848-53. - "Despatches  of   Wellington," 8   vols.,  1844-47.-"  Supplementary  Despatches  and  Memoranda,"  15 vols.,   1858-72.  The   Wellington  despatches  give   a   history  of   the   congress

ii from  the  English  point   of   view. - Pozzo  di   Sorgo,  "   Corresp.  Diplom.  du Comte  Pozzo  di   Borgo,"  1890,   from  the   Russian  point   of   view. - The  German documents,  Minister,  Stein,   Cragern   (see   Dahlmann-Waitz),  are  of   less  importance.

WORKS.- FOR  A   GENERAL  ACCOUNT.- W.  Oncken,  "   Das  Zeitalter  der Revolution,  des  Kaiserreiches  und  der  Befreiungskriege,"  vol.  ii.,   1887 (Oncken  collection),  is   still   the   most  reliable  general  history.  In   English,

Fyffe,'"   Modern  History,"  3   vols.,  begins   at   1792. In   French,  Gervinus,  "Hist,  du   XIX6  Siecle,"  translated  from  the  German (in   the   original,  vol.   i.,i855),   detailed,  but   ill   provided  with  references. ON  THE  INVASIONS.- H.   Houssaye,  "   1814"   and  "   1815,"   1888-93.

ON  THE  CONGRESS  AND  THE  TREATIES.- Angeberg,  "   Le   Congresde  Vienne et   les   Traites  de   1815,"   1864   ;   Bernhavdi,  "   Gesch.  Russlands  und  der  Europaeischen  Politik,"  vol.   i.,   1863   (coll.   of   contemporary  histories)  ;   these  are the   two  most  detailed  accounts  of   negotiations,  but  neither  of   them  was able  to   make  use  of   the   documents  with  which  we  are  acquainted  to-day. A.   Sorel,   "   Les   Traites  de   1815,"   1873.- A.   Debidour,  "   Hist.  Diplom.  de   1'Europe,"  1874-78,  vol.  i.,   1891.- Seeley,  "Life  of   Stein."- Hertslet,  "Map   of Europe  by   Treaty."

## ENGLAND.

## CHAPTER  II.

ENGLAND    BEFORE    THE    REFORM    OF    1832.

ENGLAND  in   the   nineteenth  century  has   served  as  a  political model  for   Europe.  The  English  people  developed  the   political mechanism  of   modern  Europe,  constitutional  monarchy,  parliamentary government,  and   safeguards  for   personal  liberty.  The other  nations  have  only   imitated  them.  The  parties   that  distinguish the   political   life   of   the   nineteenth  century   (conservative, liberal,   radical,   and   socialist)  were  constituted  in   England  before appearing  in   other  countries.  It   is   therefore  natural  to   begin the   political   history   with   England.

## ENGLAND  BEFORE  THE  REFORM  BILL.

The  United  Kingdom  of   Great  Britain  and   Ireland  emerged  in 1814   from  a   long   war,  almost  continuous  since  1793,  which  had enlarged  its   colonial  empire   and   strengthened  its   internal  organization. The   "   Old  England  "   of   the   eighteenth  century  stood firm;   having  had   no  revolution,  it   needed  no  restoration.  In order  to   understand  this   "   Old   England  "   it   is   necessary  to   know the   organization  of   the   English   government,  the   composition  of English  society,  and   the   special   condition  of   Ireland.

The  public   life   of   Great  Britain  centred  in   three  groups  of   old institutions,  so   long   united  that   they   seemed  inseparable:  the   central government,  the   local   authorities,  and   the   Church.

The  Central  Government. - The  central  government  of   England, extending   since   1707   to   Scotland  and   since  1800   to   Ireland, was  made  up   officially  of   three  parts,  the   King   assisted  by   the Privy   Council,  the   House  of   Lords,  and   the   House  of   Commons. These  were  ancient  bodies,  whose  traditional  organization  dates back  to   the   fourteenth  century.

The  King,   hereditary  and  inviolable,  remained  the   legal   ruler

of   the   kingdom.  As   representative  of   the   state  he   made  peace, war,  and  treaties.  As   fountain  of   justice  he   appointed  the judges,  who  decreed  justice   in   his   name.  As   head  of   the   government he   appointed  all   officers,  summoned  Parliament,  and dissolved  it;   his   assent  was  necessary  to   the   enactment  of   laws. He  had  still   in   law   the   same  rights   as   his   predecessors  in   the Middle  Ages;   and,   like   those,   he   had   to   assist  him   in   governing a   council  whose  members  he   appointed.

The  House  of   Lords  was  still,   as   in   the   Middle  Ages,   made  up of   hereditary  peers  and  of   new  peers  created  by   the   King   but transmitting  their  title  to   their  descendants.  Its   sittings  were governed  by   ancient  forms.

The  House  of   Commons,  composed  of   deputies  chosen  by   longestablished  modes  of   election,  was  also   subject   to   ancient  forms. Both  houses  sat   in   the   same  place,   Westminster,  and  together formed  the   Parliament.

The  powers  of   the   King,   of   the   Council,  and   of   the   Parliament had  been  settled  by   usage.  The  English  people  had  neither  a written  constitution  nor   had   their  laws  been  reduced  to   a  code; and   of   these   facts   they   were  proud.*   Precedent  and   tradition  governed political   matters,  while   private   affairs  were  settled  by   common law.   In   form   the   King   was  still   the   sole   head   of   the   government, and   everything   was   done   in   his   name.  Parliament  was only   an  aid   for   him,   and   was  unable  even  to   meet  without  his order;  the   ministers  were  only   his   advisers.  But   three  customs established  in   the   eighteenth  century  had   radically  transformed this   system.

1.   The   King,   though   invested  with  all   the   powers,  exercised none  of   them  personally.     Every   political  act  ordered  by   the King   had   to   be   ordered  through  a   minister  who   assumed  the   responsibility for   it.     The   King   no   longer   governed;  he   let   his   ministers govern   in   his   name.

2.   The   ministers  did   not  act   singly;   they   met   in   cabinet  council to   decide  on  matters  of   state.     This   meeting   had   no   legal   recognition; even   to-day   the   term  cabinet  cannot  be   used   in   an  official act.      But   in   fact   the   meeting   of   ministers  charged   with   governing in   the   name  of   the   King   had   become  the   principal  organ  of the   state.     The   Cabinet  not   being   an  official  body,   the   number  of its   members  has   never  been  fixed;   it   varies  from  twelve  to   nineteen.   Since   the   eighteenth  century  the   ministry   has   been  reteen.

*   Arthur  Young  in   1789   ridiculed  Frenchmen  who   imagined  there  is   "   a receipt  for   making  a   constitution."

garded  as  a   unit,   made  up   of   men  of   one  mind   regarding  public policy.  One  of   the   members  acts  as   head   and   speaks   for   the   ministry as   a   whole;   he   is   called   the   prime   minister,  but   this   is   only   a popular  name.  As   late  as  1806  it   was  said   that   "   the   English constitution  abhors  the   idea  of   a   prime   minister."

If   the   power  of   the   House  of   Commons  had   been  confined  to voting   the   budget   and   passing   bills,   it   would  have  remained  the subordinate  authority  it   still   is   in   the   constitutional  monarchies (Prussia  and  Austria).  Not  by   the  exercise  of   its   legislative power,  recognised  by   law,   but,   in   the   gradual   process  of   custom, by   appropriating  to   itself  the   executive  power,  exercised  by   the Cabinet  in   the   King's   name,   has   it   established  Parliamentary  government. That   regime   consists  in   transferring  the   substance  of the   royal   power  to   the   majority  in   Parliament,  leaving   the   King only   a   pre-eminence  in   dignity :   "   the   King   reigns,   but   does   not

3.   The   King   in   appointing  the   ministry  did   not   act   on   his   own judgment;  personally  he   was  not  responsible.  By   a  constitutional fiction   the   King   can   do   no  wrong.   If   wrong   be   done by   his   order,   the   act   is   that   of   his   evil   advisers,  and   they   alone are  responsible.  The  responsibility  thus  borne  by   the   ministers was  held  to   be   to   Parliament.  In   practice  a   ministry  could  remain in   office  only   so   long   as   it   had   the   confidence  of   a   majority in   the   House  of   Commons.  If   the   House  wished  to   end   a   ministry, it   could  do   so  without  needing  even  to   bring   formal  charges against  it.   It   was  enough   to   refuse  supplies   or   to   pass  a   vote  of censure.  The  King   was  thus  indirectly  compelled  to  take  for ministers  the   leaders  of   the   party   having   a   majority   in   the   House of   Commons.  Not,   however,  in   the   sense  that   these  leaders  must all   be   Commoners  : it   was  customary  still   to   take   at   least   as   many ministers  from  the   House  of   Lords  as   from  the   House  of   Commons. Thus,   the   King   having   yielded   the   control  to   his   ministry, and   the   ministry   having   become  a   delegation  of   the   party in   control  of   the   Commons,  it   was  the   House  of   Commons  that indirectly  exercised  the   royal   power. mons.

govern." Parliamentary  government  seems  to-day  so  characteristic  of English  ways  that  one  easily   forgets   how  recent  a   growth  it   is. It   existed  under  the   first   two   Georges   (1714-1760),  but   the   practice was   not   definitely   settled,   and   even  the   theory   was  not   frankly admitted,  when  George  III.   again   called  it   in   question.  The   first two   Georges  had   been   pleased   to   take   their   ministers  from  the   majority in   Parliament,  and  to   follow  their  advice.  But   the   action

iese  two   kings   did   not   alter   the   legal   right   of   the   Crown   (the prerogative'}  ; their  successors  might   make  other  use  of   it.   George III.  asserted  this  position,  and   during  his   long   reign   (17601820)   he   strove  to   return  to   the   older  practice,   which  accorded with  the   official  theory   of   a   balance  between  the   three  powers, King,   Lords,  and   Commons.  He   did   not  admit  without  qualification any   of   the   new  usages.  He   wished  to   preside  personally at   Cabinet  meetings,  and   to   be   his   own  prime   minister.  He refused  his   assent  to   measures  that   were  personally  distasteful to   him  although  urged   by   his   ministers.  He   repeatedly  asked ministers  to  resign   because  he   disapproved  their  policy.  He tried  long   to   prevent  the   growth   of   unity   in   the   Cabinet,  by systematically  drawing  ministers  from  different  political  groups. He  did   not  think  it   necessary  to   take   as  ministers  the   leading men  of   the   Parliamentary  majority.

In   his   struggle   against   Parliamentary  government,  George   III. was  helped  by   the   Parliament  itself.  The  old   Royalist  party, now  become  the   Tory   party,  continued  to   uphold  the   power  of the   King   and   to   reject   parliamentary  rule  as   it   was  practised by   the   Whigs.  It   is   probable  that   in   the   eighteenth  century  the Tories  already  commanded  a  majority  of   the   voters, - all   of   the gentry  and  the   clergy   being   Tories.  The  Whigs,  supported  by the   government  (they   had   been  in   power  since  1715),   had   created an  artificial  majority  in   the   House.  But   when  the   King   joined   the Tories, the   Tory   party   acquired  an  overwhelming  majority  in   the House  and  held  it   during   half   a   century  (1783-1830).  During all   this   time   the   ministries  were   Tory   in   character  and   the   King's power  was  respected.

Thus  assisted  by   the   Tories,  George  III.   was  able   to   have  a policy   of   his   own  and   to   force   it   upon   his   ministers,  at   least   during his   lucid   intervals.  His   son,  who   succeeded  him   as  regent   in 1811,   when  his   insanity  became  complete,  and  who  subsequently became  king   under  the   name  of   George   IV.   (1820-1830),  accordingly found   the   constitutional  methods  of   procedure  seriously  disturbed. England   still   hesitated  between  two   forms  of   government. The   Tory   party   defended  the   traditional  theory   of   the   constitutional monarchy   which   assigned   to   Parliament  the   subordinate role   of   acting   as   a   check   upon   the   government,  and   yielded   to the   King   the   power   to   choose  and   to   direct  his   ministers  ;   gave   him, in   other   words,   the   practical  means  of   establishing  a   personal   government. The   Whig   party   accepted  the   new  theory   of   parliamentary rule   which   strips   the   King   of   his   real   power,   leaving   him

## 1  6  ENGLAND  BEFORE    7"HE  REFORM  OF  1832.

only   a   vague   influence,  and   transfers  the   actual  work   of   governing to   the   ministry,  which  becomes  itself  responsible  to   the   majority of   the   House  of   Commons.

During  the   wars  with  France  domestic  strife  had   ceased  ; Parliament obeyed   the   ministry  ; it   had   passed   the   laws   of   exception to   crush  the   Radical  party,   admirers  of   the   Revolution  (1795)   ; it had  sanctioned  the  measures  taken  against  the  commerce  of France  by   means  of   simple   "   orders  in   council,"  that   is   to   say, "royal  decrees"  (1806).  The  question  of   sovereignty  had been  temporarily  laid  aside  through  the   harmony  existing  between the   King   and   the   majority  ; but   it   had   not   been   answered, and  came  once  more  to   the   front  in   1814:   Should  England  have  a personal  government  or  parliamentary  rule   ?

Local  Powers. - Even  the  composition  of  the  Parliament was  governed  by   tradition.  The  House  of   Commons  was elected,  not   by   the   nation,   but   by   privileged  local  bodies.  Thus the   central  government  was  connected  with  local  institutions.

In   England  the   local  government  was  irregularly  organized and,   contrary  to   the   opinion   now  become  classic,  it   was  weak. The  self-government  so   boasted  of   by   England  was  confined  to the   old   cities  and   privileged  boroughs,  each  administered  by   an old   municipal  corporation  elected  by   hereditary  burgesses.  All the   rest   of   the   country,  all   the   villages   and   all   the   new  cities,   were without  elected  local  administration.  In   these,   local  affairs  were managed  by   the   vestry,  or  parish   meeting,  and   church  wardens, under  the   direct  control  of   the   rector  and   the   squire.   It   was  the justices  of   the   peace,  appointed  by   the   government  from  among the   gentry,  who,   without  compensation,  undertook  the   management of   the   police,   of   the   assessment  of   taxes,  and   even  of   justice, sometimes  working  singly,   sometimes  meeting  in   session  to deliberate  together.  Each  was  master  in   his   own  district,  without other   check   than   the   right   of   aggrieved  persons  to   appeal   to the   ordinary  tribunals  against   his   action.

There  was  still   for   each   county  a   lord   lieutenant,  formerly   commander of   the   militia,   also   taken  from  among  the   great   landowners of   the   county,   but   now  reduced  to   mere  ceremonial  functions. The   original   character  of   the   English   local  administration was  not   to   employ   salaried  officers;  all   the   work  was   done gratuitously  by   the   prominent  men  of   the   county.  The  twelve judges  of   the   three  Common  Law  Courts  were  the   only   judges remunerated  by   the   state.  These  were  concentrated  in   the   capital, going   about   the   country  only   to   hold   jury   trials   and   to   hear tions tion

appeals  from  the   local  justices.  There  were  no  permanent  local courts  except  those  of   the   justices   of   the   peace   in   Petty   and Quarter  Sessions.

This  English  self-government  was  not  therefore  the   government of   the   country  by   itself,   but   the   government  of   the   country by   the   local   aristocracy.

The  Electoral  System. - It   was  the   local  bodies  that   sent  the representatives  to   the   House  of   Commons.  There  were  three classes  of   these  constituencies:  the   counties,  electing  186   members; the   boroughs,   electing   467   members;  and   the   universities, electing  5   members.  The  boroughs  were  not  ordinarily  electoral districts,   but   privileged   bodies,   very   unequally  distributed, without  regard   either  to   population  or   to   territory.  Scotland  had only   45   members,  Wales  24;   Ireland,  incorporated  with  Great Britain  in   1800,   had   100  members.  In   England  the   privileged boroughs  were  chiefly  in   the   south;  10  southern  counties  had 237  members,  the   other  30   counties  had  onl&gt;   252.   The  poor and  backward  county  of   Cornwall  had  44,   lacking  only   one  of having  as  many  as  all   Scotland.

The  majority  of   these  bodies  had   no  political   life.  There  were in   England  34   rotten  boroughs,  old   abandoned  villages  (Beeralston  had  one  house,  Dunwich  had  been  covered  with  water for   centuries,  Gatton  was  simply   a   park).  Many   others  were  reduced to   less   than   fifty   voters.  These  were   known  as   pocket   boroughs; all   the   houses  belonged  to   one  great   landlord,  who   directed the   vote  of   all   his   tenants.  The   patron   also   treated  the   seats  belonging to   his   borough  as   his   property,  and   disposed  of   them  by gift   or   sale.   Other  boroughs  were  under  government  control  and were  obliged  to   return  government  candidates.  It   was  estimated that   of   658   representatives,  424   were   designated  beforehand  by   the ministry  or   by   the   252   patrons.

The  English  counties,  and   some  of   the   large   boroughs  in   which the   householders  or   the   taxpayers  had   the   right   of   voting,   were the   only   constituencies  in   which  real   elections  were  held.  Even in   some  of   these   it   was  no  uncommon  thing   to   dispense  with   the formality  of   an  election.  On   the   day   fixed  for   the   nomination  of candidates  there  appeared  only   as  many  as   there  were  seats  to   be filled.  The  prominent  men  of   the   county   having   agreed   on  the men  to   be   put   in   nomination,  the   sheriff  had   only   to   declare  these elected.  This  was  what  was  called  an  uncontented  election,  and many  of   the   county  elections  were  conducted  in   just   this   way.

Ordinarily  at   a   general   election  there  were  not  more  than   fifty

constituencies  which  were  really   contested.  In   1818  the   struggle was   considered  very   hot   because  there   were  100  contested  elections. In   all   the   counties  of   Scotland  there  were  not  3000 voters  in   all.  In   Bute  County  (14,000  inhabitants,  21  voters) they   tell   the   story   of   an  election  at   which  only   one  voter  appeared; he   constituted  the   assembly,  by   electing   himself  as  chairman, made   a   speech   in   favor   of   his   own  election,  put   his   name  to the   vote,   and   declared  himself  unanimously  elected.

The  contested  election  was  held  under  old   disorderly  forms. On  nomination  day,   in   presence  of   the   crowd,  gathered  sometimes in   the   open  air,   the   sheriff  put   the   question  on   the   candidates one   by   one,  and   the   crowd  voted  on  each  by   shouting  and by   raised  hands  in   the   midst  of   much  confusion.  The  real  electors were  mixed  in   right   and   left   with  non-electors,  who,   of course,  also   raised  their   hands.  This  was  a   mere  farce.  The   defeated candidate  had   the   right   to   demand  a   poll.   Then  the   real election  began.  A   poll-book  was  opened  in   which  each  voter had  the   right   to   have  his   vote  inscribed;  this  operation  could go   on   for   forty   days   (reduced  in   1784   to   fifteen).  The   inhabitants of   the   place   were  interested  in   prolonging  the   polling,  for in   a   hotly   contested  election  the   price   of   votes  was  sure  to   go   up. The  vote  being   public   and   recorded  in   a   book,   the   candidates could  effectively  buy   or   threaten  the   voters.  This  was  unlawful, but   was   done   without  much  concealment.  Some  boroughs  in which  the   corporation  elected  the   members  put   their  seats  on  sale. In   others  the   proprietors  of   the   land   on  which  the   borough   stood dictated  their  choice  to   the   inhabitants,  their  tenants;  in   1829,   at Newark,  the   Duke  of   Newcastle  turned  out  587   of   his   tenants for   having   dared  to   vote   for   the   other  candidate.  This   was  complained of   in   the   House,  and   the   Duke  replied:   "   Have  I   not  the right   to   do   as   I   wish   with   my   own?"

Pitt   had   proposed  in   1785   a   timid  reform  which  consisted  in buying  up   the   seats  of   36   rotten  boroughs,  to   be   assigned  to   the counties.  He   could  not  get   it   passed.  The  elections  remained corrupt,  and  the   parvenus,  bankers,  manufacturers,  and  "   nabobs," taking   advantage  of   this   to   buy   the   position   of   member of   Parliament,  gave  another  increase  to   the   prices   of   seats.

In   1814   the   greater  number  of   seats  were  simply   acquired  by inheritance,  by   purchase,  or   by   family   influence.  The   House  was representative  only   in   name;   it   was  an  assemblage  of   landlords, millionaires,  and   their  nominees,  independent  of   the   mass  of   the nation.  The  sovereignty  belonged  to   the   King   and   the   aristoc-

racy.  The  Parliamentary  system  was  not  a  representative  government, but   an   oligarchical  government.

The  Church. - The  organization  of   the   Church  was  very  complicated. Without   counting   the   sects,   the   United  Kingdom  was divided  between  three  churches,  each  predominating  in   one of   the   three  countries:  the   Anglican  Church  in   England,  the Presbyterian  in   Scotland,  and  the   Roman  Catholic  in   Ireland. Of   these  only   two  were  officially  recognised,  the   Anglican  as   the Church  of   England,  and   the   Presbyterian  as   the   Church  of   Scotland ;   the   Catholic  Church  was   forbidden  by   law   and   only   tolerated in   fact.

The  Established  Church  was  the   only   one  officially   protected  and endowed.  The  English  government,  nevertheless,  granted  absolute freedom  of   worship.  The  only   restriction  laid   upon   Dissenters was   from   holding   public   office,   and   this   was   in   practice set  aside  by   the   Annual  Indemnity  Act,   passed  each  year   by Parliament.

Catholic  worship  did   not  enjoy   even  this   toleration  and   was  still forbidden  by   law.  Roman  Catholics  were  debarred  from holding  public  office  and  from  sitting  in  either  House of  Parliament  by   the  requirement  of   the  oath  of   supremacy and   the   declaration  against   transubstantiation.  In   1807 George  III.  dismissed  the  Grenville  ministry  .for  refusing  to promise  never  to   renew  their  proposition  looking  to   the   admission of   Catholics  to   offices  in   the   army  and   navy.

The  Anglican  Church  kept   up   its   ecclesiastical  courts,  where were  tried  not  only   matters  of   church  discipline,  but   lay   cases of   divorce,  validity   of   marriage,  and   administration  of   wills.  It also   had   the   exclusive  right   to   perform  marriages,  and   it   registered births   and   deaths.

The  Church  maintained  its   established  position.  Besides  the income  from  its   own  estates,  it   had   an  annual  revenue  from  tithes and   church  rates.  The   tithe  was  a   tenth  part   of   the   produce   of   all lands,   whether  held   by   Churchmen  or  others;  the   church  rate  was a   tax   imposed,  by   vote  of   the   parish   vestry,  on  all   rate-payers, whether  Churchmen  or  not.  The  tithes  went  for   the   support  of the   clergy;   the   rates  were  levied  for   the   maintenance  and   care of   the   buildings,  grounds,  etc.,   belonging  to   the   Church.  The Church  maintained  its   ancient  hierarchy:  the   archbishops  and bishops,  the   chapters  of   cathedrals,  the   archdeacons,  appointed by   the   government,  and   the   parsons,  appointed  by   the   patrons, who  were  either  the   bishop,   the   Lord  Chancellor,  the   chapter,   or,

as   was  usually   the   case,  a   layman   who   owned  the   advowson  of   the living.  In   fact,   the   clergymen  were  usually   the   younger  sons  of the   great   families,  who,   with   the   income  from  their   parishes,  continued to   live   like   gentlemen,  hunting  and   riding,   exercising  the functions  of   justice   of   the   peace,  and   bringing  up   a   family.   Many did   not   even  reside  in   their   parish,   but   left   it   in   charge   of   a   curate, an  ecclesiastic  taken  from  the   ranks  of   the   lower  middle  class, whom  they   paid   with  a  small  portion  of   their  own  income.

The  Church  of   Scotland  held,   and   still   holds  to   this   day,   its   old federative  constitution  recognised  by   the   Act   of   Union  in   1707. Each  parish   forms  a   body   governed  by   the   pastor  and   the   lay elders.  A   group  of   parishes  unites  to   form  a   presbytery,  governed by   the   united  body   of   pastors  and   an  elder  from  each   parish. The   meeting   of   the   members  of   several  presbyteries  makes what  is   called  a   Synod.  Finally,   at   the   head   of   this   hierarchy,  the General  Assembly,  composed  of   delegates  from  each  presbytery, each  royal   borough,  and   each  university,  is   the   supreme  power of   the   Established  Church  of   Scotland.  All   these  assemblages are  courts  of   discipline  having   power  of   censorship  over  the   faith and   the   private   life   of   the   pastors  and   the   faithful;   the   presbytery is   practically  the   strongest  power. ish.

The  Church  of   Scotland,  in   the  eighteenth  century,  had assumed  a   tyrannical  supervision  over  the   private   life   of   the   parishioners ; but   the   government  and   the   lay   tribunals,  by   refusing to   recognise  its   right   to   discipline  private   individuals  in   matters of   conduct,  had   succeeded  in   restricting  it   to   questions  of   religion (to   await  the   conflict  with   the   state  which,   in   1843,   was  to   bring about  the   secession  of   the   Free  Church).

Its   revenues  consisted  of   the   tithes,   the   church  rate,   and   private contributions  (the   latter  amounting  to   almost  one-half).

The  Church  of   Scotland,  always   poor,  paid   its   members  little, but   it   knew   neither  the   enormous  inequality  between  the   incomes of   the   various  pastors,  nor  the   undisguised  sale  of   livings   so common  in   the   Church  of   England;  the  Scotch  clergy   were more  independent  and  more  active  than  the   English.

Social  Conditions. - English  society  was  based  on  the   distinctions between  rich   and   poor:   those   who   had   possessions  had   all the   rights,   private   and   political;  those  who  had   nothing  were shut   out   from   all   public   life,   and   even   from   some  of   the   securities for   personal  liberty.  They   were  as   two  separate  nations  placed one  over  the   other,   the   one  privileged,  the   other  disinherited.

The  authors  who  described  English  political  life   or  who   theo-

rized  about  it,   knew  only   the   privileged  nation ; they   believed  the English  to   be   all   equal   before  the   law,   all   protected  by   the   law. And,  indeed,  the   official  political  acts  made  no   distinctions,  as in   other  countries,  between  nobles  and  commons;  the  Bill  of Rights  spoke   for   the   "   rights   of   the   English   people   "   without class  distinctions.  But,   in   fact,   custom  and   some  special   laws little   known  to   the   public   had   finally   formed  under  the   legal   nation a   lower  class,   shut   out   from  political   rights.

The  constitution  forbade  compulsory  military  service;  but   in reality   the   government,  when  there  was  need  of   sailors  for   the royal   navy,  got   them  by   force,   seizing   sailors,  and   even  some that   were  not  sailors  at   all.   This   was  the   system  of   impressment which  had  earlier  struck  Voltaire.  It   was  practised  only   on  the poor.

The  constitution  did   not   admit  that   manual  labour  entailed  any loss   of   the   rights   of   an   English   subject.  But   Parliament,  made up   of   landowners  and   employers,  had   made  laws  which  put   the labouring  classes  in   the   power  of   their  employers.  A   law   passed in   the   sixteenth  century  obliged  farm  labourers  to   accept  work from  any   landowner  who  offered  them  the   legal   wage  ;   a   justice   of the   peace  might   imprison  any   man  who   refused.  Day-labourers were  thus  bound  to   the   soil.

A   series  of   laws   from  the   sixteenth  to   the   eighteenth  century had  created  the   legal   category  of   the   poor,  and  the   local  tax called  the   poor-rate.  Whoever  had  no   independent  means  of support  was  kept   at   the   expense  of   the   parish   and   came  under the   authority  of   the   overseers  of   the   poor.   These  overseers  had the   power  to   set   them  at   any   sort  of   work  and,   if   they   refused  it, to   shut   them  up   in   the   workhouse,  and   to   put   their  children  out as   apprentices  wherever  they   pleased;  this   meant,   in   practice,  selling them   to   manufacturers  to   make  them  work  in   the   factories. The  poor  man  could  not   freely   change  his   dwelling-place,  for every  parish   had   the   right   of   denying  a  settlement  to   anyone who  was  likely   to   become  a   public   charge.  Now,   as  nearly   all the   lands  of   England  belonged  to   the   gentry,  the   English  peasants had   ordinarily  no  means  of   self-support;  so   the   greater number  of   them  fell   into   the   class  of   assisted  poor,  numbering 1,340,000  in   1811,   1,500,000  in   1821,   and   1,850,000  in   1827.

The  constitution  recognised  the   right   of   forming  unions  and clubs.  The  city   artisans  had   had   their  trade  guilds   protected  by regulations  which  fixed  the   maximum  number  of   apprentices  and the   minimum  of   wages.  But   when  the   factory   system  arose,  and

crowds  of   labourers  were  gathered  in   new  places,   the   employers held  themselves  free  from  old   regulations  favouring  the   labourers. Nor   was   this   all.   When  the   workingmen  demanded  the   application of   these  regulations  the   employers  not  only   had  the former  restrictions  abolished,  but   induced  Parliament  to   pass   laws (1799-1800)  which  forbade  artisans,  under  penalty  of   several months'  imprisonment,  to   band  themselves  together  for   an   increase of   pay.  It   became  a  misdemeanour  for  workmen  to club  together,  and  a   justice   of   the   peace   had   the   power  to   send them  to   jail   for   it. ers.

Thus  sailors,  farm  labourers,  paupers,  workmen,  thrust  outside of   common  rights,   at   the   mercy  of   press-gangs,  overseers  of   the poor,  employers,  and   justices  of   the   peace,   formed  an   inferior  nation, without  political   power,  without  assured  means  of   existence, without  guarantee  of   personal  liberty.

From  this   disinherited  class  came  many  criminals,  notably  robbers. To   suppress  these   Parliament  had   passed   fierce  laws  pronouncing the   penalty  of   death  for   more  than  200  acts   declared  to be   felonies;  for   example,  poaching  on  game  preserves  and   shoplifting were  capital   crimes.

The   whole  nation,  in   the   contemplation  of   the   law,   was  swayed by   two  rival  aristocracies:  that  of   landed  proprietors,  allied with  the  clergy,  supreme  in   the  country  parts;  and  that  of capitalists  and  great  manufacturers,  supreme  in   the  cities. These  were  economic  masters  of   the   country.

There  remained  in   1815   almost  no   independent  peasants,  small landed  proprietors,  or   tenants  on   lease;   all   lands  had   finally   been absorbed  into  great  estates,  belonging  to   lords  or  squires. These  let   out   their   lands   to   farmers,  who   had   them  cultivated  by hired   labourers.  A   village   was  simply   a   group  of   cottages  occupied by   these   workmen,  where  the   lord   or  squire   acted  as  master. Grain  was  still   England's  chief  product.  In   order  to   maintain an  advantageous  price,   the   proprietors  had   got   the   Corn  Laws passed,  which  excluded  foreign  grain   except   in   case  of   a   scarcity and   consequent  high   price.  The  price   was  fixed  in   1791,  at   50 shillings  a   quarter  (8   bushels) ; but   during   the   wars  with  France the   price   went  up   so   far   beyond   this   that   they   raised  the   figure to   63   shillings.  After  the   peace,  to   offset  foreign   competition, they   raised  it   again   to   80   shillings.  By   these  measures  the   income of   land   was   doubled,  to   the   benefit  of   the   owner.  Rents were  raised,  but   not   the   wages  of   the   labourers.

A   similar   concentration  had   taken   place   in    manufacturing

since  the   end   of   the   eighteenth  century.  The   industrial  system had  been  revolutionized  by   two  changes:  1st,   the   new  machines driven  by   water  or   by   steam,  and   the   new  mechanical  arts,   had created  the  factory  system;  2d,   small  employers  who  produced directly   for   a   single   business  house,   were  replaced   by   capitalist employers   who   produced  on  a   large   scale   for   the   general market  and  for   exportation.  So   was  formed  the  new  class  of large   employers  and  wholesale  merchants,  who  were  added  to the   aristocracy  of   capitalists.

The  factory  system  was  redistributing  the  population  of England.  Until  the  eighteenth  century  all   economic  and  political life   had   been  in   the   south  and   east,   near   London;  the   north and   west  remained  thinly   populated  and   backward  in   civilization. But  the   factory   system  attracted  population  to   the   neighborhood of   mines  and   streams  in   the   north  and   west,  where  dense  masses of   workmen  established  themselves.  England  was  divided  into two  regions:  the   south  and   east,   remaining  agricultural  and   controlled by   the   landowners,  were  the   home  of   conservatism;  the north  and  west,  given   over  to   manufacturing,  were  centres  of political  agitation.  In   Scotland,  where  manufacturing  had  begun, especially   along   the   Clyde,   Glasgow  became  a   seat  of   activity rivalling   Edinburgh,  the   capital.

The  Condition  of   Ireland, - Ireland  was  inhabited  by   two  nations of   different  origin :   the   native  Irish,   who   were  Catholic,  and the   settlers  from   England,  and   especially  Scotland,  most  of   whom were  Anglicans  or   Presbyterians.  The  latter  occupied  only   a part   of   the   province  of   Ulster  in   the   extreme  north.  The   native Irish  formed  the   population  of   the   other  three  provinces,  except the   Pale   in   the   neighbourhood  of   Dublin  and   a   few   other  districts where  early   settlements  of   English  had   taken  place.  But  since the   conquest  of   the   seventeenth  century  the   native  Irish  were  no longer  masters  even  in   their  own  region.  Their  religion  was only   tolerated  by   law;   their  clergy   had   neither  official  position nor  right   to   tithes;   they   lived   by   the   voluntary  contributions  of their  parishioners.  The  Anglican  Church  was  the   State  Church, recognised  by   law,   supported  by   the   income  from  its   estates  and tithes  levied  from  all   cultivators  of   the   soil   whether  Protestant or   Catholic.  All  political  offices  were  closed  to  the  Catholics; all   the   authorities,  even  the  local  justices  of   the peace,  town  councils,  and  juries,  were  Protestant - that  is, foreign.  The  land  belonged  to   English  landlords  who  ordinarily did   not   live   on   their   domains,  but   had   them  managed

by   agents  or   leased  them  to   middlemen.  The   Irish  peasant  was not  a   landowner;  he   occupied,  often  for   generations  in   the   same family,   a   small  farm  on  which  he   had   built  his   cabin  and   which he   cultivated  subject   to   rent.  But   he   had   no  vested  right   in   the land ; he   was  a   tenant-at-will  or  at   best   a   lease-holder.  The   landlord could   evict   him   at   pleasure,   or   at   the   end   of   his   lease,   without compensation.  Population  having  greatly  increased  in   the eighteenth  century,  the   land  was  subdivided  to   such  a   point   that each  tenant  had   barely   enough  ground  to   raise  the   necessary  potatoes for   himself  and  his   family;   the   wretchedness  of   the   Irish peasant  had   become  proverbial.

In   Ulster,   peopled   by   Scotch  Presbyterians,  the   tenants  had   a more  stable  tenure.  Under  the   Ulster  custom  the   landlords  did not  evict   their   tenants  except   in   special   cases  and   on  payment  of compensation  for   improvements.

Politically  Ireland  had   been,   until  1800,   a   dependency  of   Great Britain,  subject   to   the   King   and   the   British  Parliament,  but   with a   Parliament  of   its   own   in   Dublin.  After  1782   the   Irish  Parliament had   been   allowed  to   legislate   somewhat  independently.  It had   repealed  a   part   of   the   exceptional  laws   against   the   Catholics, and   had   allowed  them  to   vote  at   elections.  But   Irish  autonomy was  destroyed  at   a   blow  by   the   Act   of   Union  in   1800,   passed   by the   Irish  Parliament  in   spite   of   strong  opposition  on  the   part of   Irish   patriots.  The  Irish  Parliament  was  suppressed;  Ireland, swallowed  up   in   Great  Britain,  had   her   representatives  in the   British  Parliament,  keeping  her   own  electoral  system,  which allowed  Catholics  to   vote  and   conferred  the   franchise  on  all   leaseholders of   land   worth  40   shillings   a   year,   that   is   to   say,   on  almost every  peasant.  The  representatives  had  to  be  Protestant, although  the   mass  of   Irish  voters  were  Catholics.  Ireland  preserved her   separate  administration,  the   Lord  Lieutenant  and   his Secretary,  assisted  by   the   Irish  Privy   Council.

Between  the   lower  nation  of   Irish  peasants  and   the   superior nation  of   English   or   Scotch  landlords  the   contrast  was  not  shown in   speech : *   the   Irish,   except   in   the   west,   had   given   up   the   Celtic language  and  adopted  English.  But  difference  of   religion  was sufficient  to   remind  the   Irish  peasants  of   the   foreign   origin   of their  landlords.  Thus  the   social  and  religious  antipathy  to   the Protestant  landlord  took  the   form  of   a   national  sentiment  among the   Irish.

*   Even  the   Irish  national  songs  were  in   English.

## AGITATION  FOR  REFORM.

The  Reform  Movement. - The  system  above  described  was  of old   origin,   but   it   had   been   further  consolidated  in   the   years  preceding 1814.   The   French  Revolution,  by   alarming  the   ruling class,   had   filled   them  with   a   dread  of   every   innovation  and   had prevented,  for   thirty   years,  the   adoption  of   any  reform.  The wars  against  France  had  raised  the  national  debt  from  ^237,000,000  in   1791   to   ^8 1  6,000,000  in   1815:   this   added  greatly   to the   political  influence  of   the   bankers  and   money   lenders.  The new  industrial  system  had  created  an   influential  class  of   great manufacturers.  The  number  of   hired  labourers  was  growing,  and the   gap   between  rich   and   poor  was  widening.

While  France  was  ridding  herself  of   her   old   regime,   England was  bracing  herself  to   preserve  hers.  England  was  more  thoroughly "   old   England  "   in   1814   than   in   1789.   This   old   England showed  itself  with  features  more  clear-cut  than  ever - features  so striking  that   one  might   easily   take  them  for   peculiarities  of   race inborn  in   the   English   nature:  extreme  contrast  between  rich  and poor;  a  government  monarchical  and  representative  in   appearance, but   in   reality   controlled  by   an  oligarchy  of   wealthy   landowners; an   aristocratic  church,   and   a   religion   prescribed  by   law; hence,  in   public   life,   venality   and   corruption  ; in   private   life,   luxury, pride,   and   formalism;  hypocrisy  on  the   part   of   the   rich, misery,  depression,  and  servility  on  the   part   of   the   poor;  eagerness for   titles   and   for   the   money  necessary  to   get   into   good society  - that  state  of   mind  which  Thackeray  described  under the   new  name  of   snob.

This  whole  condition  of   things   was  sanctified  by   its   antiquity. In   contrast  to   the   revolutionary  Frenchman,  the   Englishman  of   the early   days   of   the   century  respected  every  established  institution because  it   was  old;   he   despised  every   innovation  because  it   was new.  The  theory  of   the  sanctity  of   tradition,  formulated  by Burke,  had   become  a   dogma   of   the   Anglican  clergy,   the   gentry, and   the   universities.  The  English  nation  in   1814   was  devoted to   aristocracy  and   tradition.  The  Tory   party,   backed  by   the King  and  an  enormous  majority  in   the  House  of   Commons, maintained  its   power  without  difficulty;  the   Liverpool  Ministry lasted  fourteen  years  (1812-27).  The  war  over,  the  landholders, who   made   up   the   majority,   put   two  measures  through Parliament.  The  first  forbade  the   importation  of   wheat  unless the   price   went  up   to   10   shillings   a   bushel;   a   rule   that   ordinarily

shut  out   foreign   wheat,  as   the   price   of   wheat  was  going   down  instead of   going   up.   The  second  abolished  the   income-tax  established during   the   war.

However,  the  peace   brought  a  movement  for   reform.  This showed  itself  in   the   large   cities  in   the   demonstrations  of   the Radicals;  in   Parliament  in   the   form  of   bills   brought  forward  by independent  members.  Each  of   the   more  prominent  Liberals consecrated  himself  to   some  special   reform:  Wilberforce  to   the abolition  of   slavery,   Romilly  and   Mackintosh  to   the   amelioration of   the   penal   code,   Grattan  and   Burdett  to   Catholic  emancipation, Grey   and   Russell  to   electoral  reform,  Brougham  to   educational and   judicial   reform.  They   knew  that  their  motions  had   not  the slightest  chance  of   being   passed   by   Parliament,  but   their  plan was  to   bring   forward  their  reforms  incessantly,  so  as   to   rouse public  interest  in   them.  .They   did   not  confine  their  efforts  to Parliament,  for   they   set   on   foot   outside  agitation  among  the   people. A   public   opinion  among  the   masses  on  political  questions began   to   manifest  itself  - a   new  thing   for   England.

In   the   eighteenth  century,  except   in   and   about  London,  the public  never  aroused  itself  except  for  religious  disputes,  for wars,  or  against  taxes.  The  awakening  of   public  opinion was  aided  by   a  creation  of   the   end   of   the   eighteenth  century: the   great   political   newspapers  had   just   been  founded,  the   Morning Chronicle  in   1769,   the   Post   in   1772,   the   Times  in   1785,   the Courier  in   1792.   In   their  early   stages  these  were  a   combination of   advertisements  and  commercial  news  with  some  leading  articles and   Parliamentary  reports.  The  government  and  Parliament viewed   with   dislike  this   new  political   power.   Far   from  encouraging the   press,  they   tried  to   hamper   it   by   fiscal   laws.  The stamp  duty   on  each  sheet  was  raised  from  2.\   pence   in   1789   to   4 pence   in   1815;   an   import   duty   was  placed   on  paper,  which  lasted until  1861.  The  press  remained  subject  to  old  laws  against seditious  libel,   which  punished  with  imprisonment  and  sometimes transportation  any   attack  on   the   King,   the   government,  or religion;  the   opposition  newspapers  were  always  harassed  with prosecutions.  In   1812  the   Hunt  brothers  were  condemned  to a   year's   imprisonment  for   saying   that  the   Morning  Post  exaggerated m   calling   the   Prince  of   Wales  an   Adonis.  From  1808 to   1821,   94   journalists  were  condemned,  12  of   them  to   transportation.

Journalists  were  held  in   contempt  by   the   ruling   class.  As   late as   1828   they   were  still   disqualified  for   admission  to   the   bar.  Men

in   public   life   who   wrote  for   the   daily   papers  were  unwilling  to confess  it.   The  press,   however,  was  beginning  to   be   a  power. Certain  Scots  established  in   London  had   revolutionized  the   newspaper business  by   the   rapidity   with   which  they   struck  off   copies. Walter,  of   the   Times,   by   using   a   steam  press,  succeeded  in   printing 1500   copies   an   hour   (1814).   He   had   come  to   have   60   columns of   advertisements.  He   had  organized  a  special   news  service, and   was   thus   able   to   defeat  the   government  scheme  of   withholding letters   sent   to   him   by   mail.  Parliament,  since  1770,   had found  itself  obliged  to   tolerate  the   reporting  of   its   debates  by   the newspapers.  This  was,  and  still   is,   the   only   means  of   publishing them,  the   English  Parliament  having  neither  stenographers  nor official  publication  of   its   discussions.  The  press  was  thus  becoming the   intermediary  between  the   Parliament  and   the   public. Newspapers,  burdened  with   the   heavy   stamp   duty,   remained a   luxury;  there  were  only   six   dailies  in   1815,   and   the   chief  of them,  the   Times,  sold  only   8000  copies.  But   the   sale  was   increasing, the   total  number  of   all   newspapers  paying   stamp   duty rose   from  16,000,000  in   1801,   to   25,000,000  in   1821,   to   say   nothing of   papers  that   evaded  the   duty.   The  great   political  reviews had   just   been   founded,  the   Edinburgh  Review  (Whig)   in   1808,   the Quarterly  Review  (Tory)   in   1809. lic.

Political  activity,  suspended  by   the   war,  reawoke  in   1814   in Parliament  and   the   press.  Then  began   a  general  attack  on  the old   system  maintained  by   the   government  and   the   Tory   majority. With  this   was  coupled  a   profound  agitation  in   the   world  of   labouring men.  English  industry,  still   in   its   infancy,   was  contending with   limited  capital   and   defective  knowledge  of   the   needs  of   the market.  The  manufacturers,  feeling  their  way,  sometimes  produced in   excess  of   the   demand,  sometimes  fell   far   short  of   it; thus  engaging  at   one  time  more  workmen  than  they   could  employ regularly,   and   then   later   dismissing  them.  For   thirty   years England  lived  in   a   state  of   periodic  crises  (1816,   1819,   1826-29, 1837,   1842,   1848).  Each  crisis  threw  into  idleness  and  misery a   part   of   the   workmen,  especially  the   spinners  and   weavers in   wool   and   cotton,  who   produced  for   exportation.  The   attendant suffering   caused  lawless  outbreaks.

Eadical  Agitation  and  Laws  of   Exception  (1816-19). - The peace   did   not   bring   the   business  revival  which  was  expected  ; it was,  on   the   contrary,  followed  by   a   crisis.  The   continental  countries tried   to   shut   out   English   products,   so   exportation  went   down  ; manufacturers,  burdened  with  unsold  goods,  cut  down  wages,

while  the   price   of   bread  was  raised  by   a   bad   harvest  and   the exclusion  of   foreign   wheat.  There  was   in   1816   a   crisis   of   idleness and   misery.   The   workmen  thrown  out  of   employment attributed  their  idleness  to   the   new  machinery  which  drove  out hand  labour;  in   some  places   they   smashed  the   machines.  This was  not  a   new  departure;  in   1811  there  had   been  outbreaks against  machinery - the   Luddite  Riots,  incited  by   a   crazy  man. The  novelty  was  the   political   character  of   the   uprising.

There  had  been  in   England  since  the  eighteenth  century  a party  working  for   radical  political  reform  through  universal  suffrage, which   now   took   the   name,  originated  in   England,  of   Radical. The   party   first   appeared   in   1769   in   the   Wilkes  affair;   it   was organized  in   1793,   in   sympathy  with  the   French  republicans,  by the   "   Corresponding  Society."  The  government  persecuted  it and   broke  it   up,   but   its   members  clung   secretly   to   their   opinions. This  was  simply  a  group  of   men  almost  all   living   in   London; but   they   made  converts  in   the   rising   generation,  and   a   new   Radical party   sprang  up,   of   sufficient  size   to   take   part   in   political   life. The  intellectual  centre  was  the   group  of   disciples  of   Bentham, the   utilitarian  school,   which  contended  against   the   old   system   in the   name  of   right   and   the   good   of   the   greatest  number.  The most  active  member  of   the   party  was  at   first  Cobbett,  son  of   a peasant,  editor  of   a   popular   newspaper,  who   wrote  for   the   labouring classes.  He   attacked  "   the   unproductive  classes,"  bondholders, and   clergy,   and   demanded  a   less   costly   religion   and government. cal

All   were  agreed   to   consider  Parliamentary  reform  the   necessary precursor  of   all   other   reforms;  before  asking   the   House  of Commons  to   interest  itself  in   the   fate   of   the   poor  classes,  the House  itself  must  first   be   made  representative - representing  the poor  as  well  as   the   rich.  The  Radicals  therefore  claimed  universal suffrage.   Cobbett  led   the   campaign  by   reducing  the   price of   his   paper,   the   Weekly   Register,   from   a   shilling   to   2   pence   (1816), and  exhorting  "   all   the   artisans  and   workmen  of   England  "   to rise   in   a   demand  for   universal  suffrage.  The  newly   elected  Lord Mayor  of   London  aided  the   reform  movement  by   declaring,  in   an address  to   the   Regent,  that   the   only   remedy   for   the   crisis  was reform.

To   intimidate  the   government,  the   Radicals  issued  a  call   to discontented  workmen.  They  organized  the  agitation  on  a grand  scale;  they   got   up  monster  outdoor  meetings,  public speeches,  huge   processions  carrying  banners  with  devices -

things   now  become  so  common  in   English  political  life   that   they are  readily  taken  for   an  old   national  custom.  They   had  been employed  before,  but   simply   as  a   means  of   celebration  for   newly elected  candidates.  The  Radicals  used  them  as  manifestations  in favour  of   an  abstract  cause.

As  early   as  1816  came  the  characteristic  demonstration  at Spafield,  near  London.  Placards  invited  all   workmen  in   distress to   meet  and   send  a   petition   to   the   Regent   and   to   the   House of   Commons  imploring  them  to   take  action.  The  meeting  took place,   and   it   was  agreed   to   meet  again   to   hear   the   answer.  The promoters  of   the  scheme  had  a  placard  made  which  thus summed  up   "the  present  state  of   Great  Britain;  four  millions of   people   on   the   point   of   starvation,  four   millions  with  a   bare subsistence,  one  and  one-half  millions  in   straitened  circumstances, one-half   million  in   dazzling   luxury;   our   brothers  in   Ireland in   a   state  even  worse.'*  At   the   second  meeting  (December. 1816)   the   speaker,   Dr.   Watson,  mounted  upon  a   carriage,  waved the   French  tri-colour  flag;   this   movement  was  therefore  a  combination of   want  and  the  French  revolutionary  spirit.  The government  had  the  meeting  dispersed  by   soldiers.  Then  the Regent  answered  the   reform  petition  by   expressing  his   "   surprise and  grief,"   and,   at   the   opening   of   Parliament,  declared  the   English electoral  system  to   be   the   most  perfect   the   world  had   ever known.  On  his   return  from  the   House  his   carriage  was  pelted with  stones.  The  government  thert  formed  a   "   committee  of secrecy  "   in   the   House,  and,   presenting  to   it   a  report  on  the "practices,  meetings,  and   combinations  .   .  .   evidently  calculated  to endanger  the   public   peace,"   denounced  the   "   conspiracy  to   overturn all   the   political   institutions  of   the   Kingdom  and   undermine the   principle  of   private   property."  The   House  voted  the   suspension of   the   Habeus  Corpus  Act  and  gave  to   each  justice   of   the peace  the   right   to   arrest,  and   detain  without  trial,   writers  and sellers  of   blasphemous  or  seditious  publications.  They   aimed above  all   at   the   press,  which  one  of   the   ministers  called  "   a   very dangerous  enemy  to   the   constitution."  A   law   gave   to   the   government the   power  to   break  up   any   meeting   which  incited  hatred or  contempt  of   the   government  or  of   the   constitution.  Refusal to   disband  was  made  a   capital   crime  (1817).

As   the   destitution  continued,  the   turbulence  continued  also. The  workmen  out  of   employment  in   Manchester  set  out  on   foot in   a   body   for   London,  each  man  carrying  a   blanket.  This ," march  of   the   Blanketeers  "   was  stopped  by   force.  In   the   manu-

facturing  regions   of   the   north,   secret  meetings  were   held   at   which there  was  talk  of   an  armed  rising.  A   mob  partly  armed marched  on   Nottingham,  another  made  a  night   attack  on  some houses.  There  were  some  noisy  state  trials:  that  of   Watson, who  was  acquitted,  and   that   of   Brandreth,  leader  of   the   Nottingham outbreak,  who   was  convicted.

The  program  of   the   Radical  party  was   definitively  formulated in   a   bill   laid   before  the   House  of   Commons  by   Burdett,  the   sole Radical  member  of   the   time:*  universal  suffrage,  secret  ballot, equal   electoral  districts,  annual  elections.  .This  bill   would  have suddenly  transferred  the   political  power  to   the   mass  of   the   nation. Neither  of   the   old   political   parties   was  willing   even  to   discuss  it. With  the   gradual  return  of   better  times,   the   Radical  agitation  fell off.  At   the   elections  of   1818   the   Whig   opposition  increased  from 140   to   170   members;  but   the   Tory   majority  was  still   enormous. In   1819   a   return  of   hard   times  brought   a   renewal  of   agitation  by the   Radicals,  especially  among  the   miners  and  weavers  of   the northwest,  who  suffered  most  from  low  wages  and  lack  of   employment. The   centre  of   disturbance  was  now  no   longer   London, but   the   neighbourhood  of   Manchester.  As   in   1816,   the   Radicals organized  an  enormous  meeting,  and   drew  up   a   petition  for   electoral reform.  It   covered  five  points   :  universal  suffrage, secret  ballot,   annual  Parliaments,  pay  of   members,  abolition  of the   property  qualification  for   candidates.

At   the   meeting  in   St.   Peter's  Field  ("   Peterloo  "),   near  Manchester, where   were  gathered   50,000  persons,  they   carried  banners with   the   Phrygian   cap,   and   the   inscriptions : "   No   duty   on corn,"  "   Liberty  or   death  "   (motto   of   the   French  Revolution), "   Equal   representation  or   death."  When  "   Orator  Hunt  "   began to   speak,   the   police   tried  to   stop   him,   but   the   crowd  defended him.  Then  a  regiment  of   cavalry  charged  into  the   mob,   and killed  quite   a   number  of   persons  (August,  1819).   The  Radicals retaliated  with   meetings  to   protest  against  the   massacre  and   to make  up   subscriptions  for   its   victims.  The   Common  Council  of London  express3d  its   indignation  against  the   "   unjust   and   impol-

*   He   was  one  of   the   members  from  Westminster,  a   borough  in   which  the right  of   voting  belonged  to   the  "householders  paying  scot  and  lot." Being  a   royal   residence  and  the  seat  of   government,  it   was  formerly counted  a   sure  ministerial  borough;  but   it   had   latterly   become  a   favourite residence  of   city   merchants  and  professional  men,  who,  since  1780,  were usually  able   to   elect   at   least   one  of   the   two  members.  Charles  James   Fox represented  the   borough  from  1780   till   his   death.- TR.

itic   action  "   of   the   government  and   affirmed  the   "   right   of   the English  people  to  assemble  and  deliberate  on  public  abuses." They   accused  the   government  of   having   violated  one  of   the   traditional liberties   of   England.

The  ministers  not  only   refused  to   make  any   investigation,  but instituted  proceedings  against  Hunt,  on  the   charge   of   "   conspiring to   change   the   law   by   threats."  They   induced  Parliament  to pass  a   set   of   exceptional  measures,  the   Six   Acts,   nicknamed  the "Gag  Laws":  ist,  speedy  trial  of   offenders;  2d,   prohibition  of drilling;  3d,   power  given   to   justices   of   the   peace   to   search  houses for   arms;  4th,   right   to   seize   every  seditious  or   blasphemous  libel, and  to   banish  the   author  for   a   second  offence  (the   government would  have  made  it   transportation);  5th,   prohibition  against holding  public   meetings  "   to   examine  into   grievances  in   state  and Church  matters,  and   with  the   object   of   preparing  petitions  ";   also against  carrying  at   such  a   meeting  arms,   bannerc,  or   inscriptions; 6th,   every  political  publication  of   less   than   two  sheets  to   be   subject to   the   stamp   duty.

Every  peaceful  manifestation  being   prevented,  some  violent Radicals  formed  in   London  the   Cato  Street  conspiracy  to   massacre the   ministers;  the   government  arrested  them  and   hanged five   of   them   (1820).  Then,   owing   to   revival  of   trade,   the   Radical agitation  subsided.

Partial  Reforms  (1820-27).- George  IV.   having  become  King (January,  1820),   the   opposition  turned  upon   him.  His  wife Caroline,  from  whom  he   had   parted,   and   to   whom  he   denied  the title   of   queen,  returned  to   England  against  his   wish  and  was received  with  enthusiasm  by   the   people.  The  ministry  did   not dare  to   insist  upon  obtaining  from  the  House  of   Lords  the divorce  demanded  by   the   King.   George   IV.,   held  in   contempt  by reason  of   his   extravagance,  debts,   and   disorderly  private   life,   had not  as  much  influence  with  the   ministry  as   his   father  had   had,   a fact   favourable  to   Parliamentary  government.

The   Tory   party   retained  an  assured  majority,  but   it   was  now   beginning to   attract  younger  men,   less   systematically  hostile  to   reform. Vacant   places   in   the   ministry   were  filled  by   new  men, Peel   in   1821,   and   Canning   in   1822.  From  this   date   the   policy   of the   ministry  became  more  liberal.  Canning  detached  England from  the   Holy   Alliance  by   supporting  the   liberal  movement  in Portugal  and   recognising  the   new   American  republics  in   their  revolt against   Spain.   Peel   consented  to   bring   before  the   House some  legal   reforms.  Thus  were  made  some  partial   reforms  : form.

I.   The  reform  of   the   criminal  code,   advocated  by   Romilly from  1808  to   his   death,   had   been   rejected   by   the   House  of   Lords. Peel  carried  the  abolition  of   the   death  penalty  for   about  a hundred  offences,  such  as  shop-lifting,  picking  pockets,  and poaching.

2..   The  economic  system  was  modified  by   a  series  of measures  carried  by   Huskisson.  England  had  retained  the Navigation  Laws  of   1651,   which  restricted  the   carrying  trade between  England  and  her  colonies  to   English  ships;   and  that between  England  and  every  other  country  to   English  ships   or ships   of   that   country.  She   was  now  threatened  with  retaliation by   other  countries.  An   act  was  passed   authorizing  the   government to   make  treaties  with  foreign   nations,  putting   their  ships   on the   same  footing   with   English   ships   (1823).  The   revenue  having increased,  the   government  was  enabled  to   cut   down  the   interest on  the   national  debt,   and   to   simplify  the   customs  tariff  by   abolishing the   duties   on  many  articles  and   reducing  the   rates  on many  others.

Without  attempting  to   abolish  the   duties  on  corn,  the   government secured  the   adoption  of   a   sliding   scale  which  allowed  the importation  of   foreign  corn  when  the   price   was  at   66   shillings a   quarter   instead  of   80   (1823).  This  was  neither  free   trade  nor even  free   trade  in   corn,   but   it   was  a   breach  in   the   system   of   prohibition.

3.   The  workmen,  in   order  to   better  their  condition,  were forming  among  men  of   the   same  trade  societies  for   mutual  assistance, called   Friendly   Societies,  or   Trade  Clubs,   later  Trade Unions;  but  as  these  associations  fell   under  the   law  of   1800 against  combinations,  they   frequently  transformed  themselves into   secret  societies,  and   even  took  the   form  of   Masonic  orders. The  London  workingmen,  better  organized  and  more  inclined to   political  action,  were  in   friendly  relations  with  the   Radicals, and   sought   to   obtain  freedom  of   association.  Mr.   Place,   a   wealthy tailor  whose  house  was  used  as  a   place   of   meeting  by   the   Radical workingmen,  conducted  the  campaign  skilfully.  Mr.  Hume,  a Radical  member  of   Parliament,  prevailed  on   Peel  and   Huskisson to   institute  an   inquiry   into   the   economic  effects  of   the   three  prohibitions pronounced  by   English  laws  against,  1st,   emigration  of workingmen;  2d,   exportation  of   machinery;  3d,   associations of   workingmen.  The  question  of   the  workingmen  was  thus slipped  in   under  the   shadow  of   the   other  two.  The  commission of   inquiry  heard  evidence,  skilfully  presented,  on  the   injury

done  to   industry  by   the   laws  against   unions.  The  commission was  convinced  and  proposed  to  repeal   these  laws.  Parliament voted  the   repeal   without  preceiving  the   full   bearing  of   its   action (1824).  But  as  soon  as   the   workingmen  used  their  liberty   to   join in   strikes  and   demand  an   increase  of   wages,  the   manufacturers and  shipowners  demanded  a  repeal   of   the   new   law.  A   new  committee of   inquiry  proposed  to  repeal   the   law  of   1824,   and   the House,  by   way  of   compromise,  adopted  the   law  of   1825.   This allowed  combinations  of   workmen  as  well  as  employers,  but solely   "   to   determine  the   scale   of   wages  or   hours  of   labour  "   (not to   limit   the   number  of   apprentices  or   to   prevent  piecework),  and   it imposed  six   months  of   hard  labour  on  anyone  who  should  resort to   violence,  threats,  molestation,  or  obstruction,  in   order  to   secure a   rise   of   wages.   The   judges   interpreted  this   clause  to   extend  to workmen  on  strike  who  reproached  fellow  workmen  for   continuing to   labour.  This  was  a   half-liberty  of   association - a   half-measure, like   all   the   measures  of   this   epoch.

At   this   time   also   began   the   great   change   in   the   means  of   communication. Clay   roads  were  replaced  by   macadamized  roads. The  first   railroad  was   built  between  Liverpool  and  Manchester in   the   years   between  1825   and   1829.

Catholic  Emancipation. - Since  the   union  with  Ireland  in   1800, the   laws   regarding  the   Catholics  had   become  contradictory.  In England  the   old   laws  still  existed  which  excluded  them  from every  office  and  corporation,  and  accordingly  prevented  them from  voting   at   elections  or   being   elected.  In   Ireland,  as  already stated,  they   had   been  admitted  to   the   right   of   voting   in   1793: Irish  Catholics,  therefore,  were  in   a   better  position  than  their  coreligionists in   England.  The  Irish  patriots  asked  for   the   repeal of   the   exceptional  laws  against  Catholics.  The  campaign  had for   a   long   time   been  conducted  in   Parliament  in   connection  with a   bill   for   the   "   relief  of   Catholics."  As   early   as  1813   Grattan had   it   discussed  in   the   House  of   Commons.  But   the   party   supporting the   privileged  position  of   the   Anglican  Church  had   succeeded in   forming  a   decided  majority  to   maintain  the   exclusion  of the   Catholics.  Since  then  the   project  had   been  proposed  every year,  and   always   rejected;  in   1821  it   passed   the   Commons,  but was  rejected  by   the   Lords.  The  royal   family   would  not   hear  of it.   George  IV.,   like   George   III.,   declared  himself  bound  by   his coronation  oath  to   maintain  the   Anglican  Church;  the   Duke  of York  presented  to   the   Lords  a   petition   against   the   reform.

The  decisive  action  came  from  the  Irish  Catholics.  They

founded  the   Catholic  Association  (1823),   directed  by   a   powerful orator,  the   lawyer  O'Connell,  who  demanded  in   the   name  of liberty  the   abolition  of   the   Catholic  disabilities.  Parliament passed  an  act   declaring  this   association  unlawful.  The   Catholic Association  dissolved  itself,  but  came  together  again   with  a change  of   name.

The  Tories  were  divided  on   the   Catholic  question.  In   1825   the House  of   Commons  passed  a   bill   for   removing  the   disabilities, but   the   Lords  rejected   it.   The   ministry  itself   was   divided  on   the question.  When  Lord  Liverpool  retired  on  account  of   ill   health, the   new  ministry,  under  Canning,  favoured  Catholic  emancipation (1827).   The   new  prime   minister,  however,  died   at   the   end of   four   months,  and  an  attempt  to  carry  on   his   ministry  and policy   under  Lord  Goderich  came  to   nothing.  In   1828   Wellington formed  a   ministry,  divided  among  the   old   Tories,  opposed  to   all reform,  and  the   Canningites,  friends  of   emancipation;  but   the Canningites  soon  withdrew.

In   1828,   by   way   of   substitute  for   the   Annual  Indemnity  Act, proposed  by   the   Wellington  ministry,  the   Whigs   obtained  a   vote of   the   Commons  in   favour  of   repealing  the   Test   Act   and   the   Corporation Act.   The   ministry,  changing  its   attitude,  brought  in and  carried  a   repealing  bill   in   accordance  with  this   vote  (1828). But  the   exclusion  of   Catholics  from  seats  in   Parliament  by   the requirement  of   oaths  depended,  not  on  the   Test  Act,   but   on  a special   act  passed   in   1679;   tms  special   act  remained  in   force,   so that  though  Catholics  could  be   appointed  to  office  after  1828, they   could  not  take  a  seat  in   either  house  of   Parliament. It   was,   however,  not   illegal   for   Catholics  to   be   nominated  and elected.  Taking  advantage  of   this  condition  of   things,  O'Connell presented  himself  at   a   by-election  in   County   Clare,   and   was triumphantly  elected.  The  Irish  peasantry  had  rebelled against  their  landlords  as  well  as  against  the  Catholic disabilities,  and   they   had   done  so   in   a   way   that   brought   the   government face   to   face   with   a   most  embarrassing  and   critical  question.

At   the   re-assembling  of   Parliament,  the   Wellington  ministry decided  to   propose  the   emancipation;  the   King   had  given   his consent  to   this,   but   later  withdrew  it.   The  ministry  therefore offered  its   resignation,  and   George   IV.   accepted  it;   but   finding   it impossible  to   form  another  ministry  he   was  obliged  to  recall Wellington  and  Peel.  An   act,   passed  by   a  vote  of   348   to  160, abolished  the   Catholic  disabilities  (1829).  At   the   same  time  they

raised  the   property  qualification  for   voting   in   the   Irish   counties from  £2   to   £10  in   order  to  shut  out  the   tenants  of   small holdings.

The  Electoral  Reform  of   1832. - The   electoral  reform  demanded by   the   Whigs   since  the   eighteenth  century   had   been   compromised by   the   Radicals.  When  Lord  John   Russell  again   took  up   the campaign  in   the   name  of   the   Whigs,  it   was  not  to   propose  a sweeping  democratic  reform.  His  scheme  regarded  the   right   of voting  as  a   privilege.  It   merely   proposed  to   extend  largely   the number  of   persons  enjoying  the   privilege.  It   also   proposed  to take   away   the   members  from  a   number  of   "   rotten  boroughs  "   and give   them  to   the   new  cities.  The   Tory   party   was  violently  opposed. Little   by   little  the   project   became  popular;  the   Whig party   increased  in   strength,  while  the   Tories  were  weakened  by dissension  between  the   Canningites  and  the   old   Tories  on   the Catholic  question.

In   the   House  elected  after  the   death  of   George   IV.   (1830),   the Tories  had   but   a   slighi   majority,  and   the   Canningite  section  of   the party  could  no   longer   be   relied  upon   to   oppose  reforms.  The July   Revolution  in   France  greatly  encouraged  the   advocates  of reform  in   England.  The   movement  began   in   the   manufacturing regions  of   the   north  and   west,  now  the   most  populous  but   leastrepresented  portion  of   England.  The  centre  of   the   movement was  Birmingham,  where  the   Political  Union  was  formed  for   the purpose  of   earring  on  the   agitation.  Wellington,  the  head  of the   ministry,  did   not  appreciate  the   change  in   public   opinion. Earl   Grey,   the   leader  of   the   Whigs   in   the   House  of   Lords,   made a   speech   in   favour  of   Parliamentary  reform.  Wellington,  in   the course  of   his   reply,   said:  "   I   have  never  read  or   heard  of   any measure  up   to   the   present  moment  which  could  in   any   degree satisfy   my   mind  that   the   state  of   the   representation  could  be   improved, or   be   rendered  more  satisfactory  to   the   country  at   large than  at   the   present  moment.  .   . I   will   go   still   further,   and   say   that if   at   the   present  moment  I   had   imposed  on  me  the   duty   of   forming a   legislature  for   any   country,  and   particularly  for   a   country like   this,   in   possession  of   great   property  of   various  descriptions, I   do   not   mean  to   assert  that   I   would  form  such  a   legislature  as* we  possess  now - for   the   nature  of   man   is   incapable  of   reaching  it at   once - but   my   great   endeavour  would  be   to   form  some  description of   legislature  which  would  produce  the   same  results"  (November, 1830).

This   declaration   ruined   the    Tory    ministry;   on    a   question

regarding  the   Civil  List  it   was   left   in   a   minority  in   the   Commons by   a   coalition  of   the   Canningites  with  the   Whigs.  The  new King,   William  IV.,   then  appointed  a   coalition  ministry  under  Earl Grey.  The  new  ministry  proposed  a  reform  bill,   providing,  ist, that   62   boroughs  returning  119   members  should  lose  the   privilege; that   47   other   boroughs   should  each   lose   I   of   its   2   members; Weymouth,  returning  4   members,  should  lose  2.   Of   the   168 seats  thus  forfeited  only   no  were  redistributed;  5   were  given   to Scotland,  5   to   Ireland,  I   to   Wales,   and   the   rest  to   the   most  populous counties  and   to   the   great   cities   which  had   heretofore  had   no representation  in   Parliament.  This  was  a  compromise  measure, as  was  customary  with  the   Whigs;  although  very   different  from the   Radical  scheme  of   reform,  it   was  none  the   less   received  with ridicule  in   the   Commons.  The  Tories,  forgetting  family   quarrels, came  together  again   to   oppose   it,   and   the   proposition  for   a   second reading  was  passed  by   a   majority  of   only   one.

The  ministry  then  dissolved  the   House  of   Commons,  and  at the   elections  of   1831   the   Whig   party   presented  itself  as   the   Reform party,   with   the   motto  "   The  Bill,   the   whole  Bill,   and   nothing but   the   Bill."  For   the   first   time   since  1783   they   carried  a majority  of  seats.  The  second  reform  bill  was  voted  by the   House  of   Commons,  but   the   House  of   Lords  rejected  it.   This produced  in   all   the   large   cities  a   political   agitation  almost  revolutionary in   spirit.  Riots  and  incendiary  fires  were  of   daily   occurrence.

In   1831   a   group  of   London  carpenters  founded,  on   the   model of   the   Methodist  religious  sect,   a   general   association,  the   National Union  of   the   Labouring  Classes;  its   object   was  to   better  the   conditions of   labour  and  secure  universal  suffrage.  At   the  same time  the   leaders  of   the   industrial  agitation  were  endeavouring  to bring   together  all   the   small  local  trade-unions  into   general   associations that   should   be   strong   enough   to   impose   a   minimum  wage on  the  employers.  Doherty,  an  Irish  Catholic  spinner,  had founded  at   Manchester  a   National  Association  for   the   Protection of   Labour  (February,  1830),   recruited  mainly   among  textile  labourers ; it   broke  up   through   lack   of   funds.

The  workingmen  had  adopted  the  policy  of   the   Radicals  in 1819,   but   they   now  allied  themselves  to   the   middle-class  Whigs in   order  to   obtain  a   partial   reform  ; they   hoped   that  this   partial reform  would  pave  the  way   for   Radical  reform  later.  It   was they   who   furnished  the   Wliigs   with  the   crowds  necessary  for   the demonstrations,  mass-meetings,  and  enormous  processions  in

London  and  Birmingham.  This  popular  movement  gave  the Whigs  the   force  to   overcome  the   resistance  of   the   Lords,   threatening them   with   a   general   uprising  if   they   did   not  yield.   A meeting  organized  by   the   Political  Union  at   Birmingham  decided even  to   refuse  the   payment  of   taxes  if   the   reform  bill   were  not passed.

After  a   short  prorogation  Parliament  was  convened  again   in December,  1831.  The  Commons  then  passed  the  third  reform bill   (March,  1832);   the   Lords,   not   daring   to   reject   it,   tried  to mutilate  it.   The  ministry  then  asked  the   King,   to   threaten  the Lords  with  the  creation  of   enough  new  peers  to  change  the majority.  The  King   refused,  accepted  their  resignation,  and   even tried  to   get   Wellington  to   form  a   new  ministry.  But   the   Tories did   not   dare   to   take   command.  The   King   was  obliged   to   recall the   Whigs,   promising  now  to   create  the   requisite  number  of   new peers.  The  House  of   Lords,  at   Wellington's  suggestion,  finally yielded  and   passed   the   bill.

The  reform  of   1832,   the   result  of   such   hard   labour,   was  a   compromise between  the   old   system  supported  by   the   Tories,  and the   sweeping  reform  demanded  by   the  Radicals.  It   preserved the   organization  of   the   old   system:  the   House  of   Commons elected  for   a   term  of   seven  years;  the   right   of   voting   considered a   privilege,  restricted  to   ancient  privileged  bodies  (counties,  boroughs, universities)  and   dependent  on   the   possession  or  occupation of   property;  the   old   form  of   public,   recorded  vote;  a   plurality sufficing  to  elect  without  second  elections.  The  number  of representatives  also  was  left  unchanged  (658).  But  it   suppressed the   most  glaring   inequality  between  the   representation of   the   northwest  and   that   of   the   southeast,  and   the   most  scandalous of   the   abuses - the   rotten  boroughs,  the   long-drawn-out polling,  and   the   great   disparity  in   the   requirements  for   voting   in different  boroughs.

The  act  contained  three  main  provisions:

First.  A   redistribution  of   seats:  143   seats  were  taken  from boroughs;  56   boroughs  under  2000  inhabitants  lost  all   representation,* 32   others  lost   one  of   their  two  seats.  These  were redistributed  to   cities  previously  without  representation  and  to counties;  22  cities  received  2   each,   21  cities  received  I   each,   65 were  given   to   English  counties,  8   to   Scotland,  5   to   Ireland.

Second.     A   more  uniform  and   wider  electoral  franchise.     In

*   One   of   these  had   but   one  member.

the   counties,  copyholders  and   leaseholders  of   lands  worth  £10   a year  were  admitted  to   vote;  also   tenants-at-will  of   lands  worth  £50 a   year.   In   the   boroughs  householders  (whether  as  owners  or tenants)  of   houses  worth  £10   a   year  were  allowed  to   vote.

Third.  The  voting  in   each  constituency  was  to   be   limited  to two  days.  Voters  were  no   longer  to  travel  long   distances  to cast  their   votes  at   the   county   town.  A   registration  of   voters  was provided  for.

The  electoral  body   was   increased  in   the   counties  from  247,000 to   370,000  electors,  in   the   boroughs  from  188,000  to  286,000. The  proportion  of   electors  to   population  increased  from  1-32   to 1-22.  The  great  majority  of   the   workingmen*  were  still  excluded from   the   right   of   voting,   the   increase  was   in   the   lower middle  class,   the   farmers  and   tenants  who  received  the   county qualification,  and,   above  all,   in   the   industrial  regions  of   the north,  where  the   cities,   hitherto  without  representation,  became enfranchised  boroughs.  This  was  not  a   democratic  reform,  but it   marked  a   determined  breaking  away   from  the   old  system. The  House  of   Commons  was  transformed  into  a   truly   elective and  representative  body ;   maintained  and  controlled  by   public opinion,  it   was  destined  to   become  the   political  sovereign  and the   instrument  of   reform.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.

Gardiner  and  Mullinger's  bibliography  of   English  history,  entitled  "   Introduction to   the  Study  of   English  History,"  2d   edit.,   1894,   stops   at   1822. From  that  point   there  is   no  single   complete  work.  The  student  must ransack  the  bibliographies  of   periods:  "   Jahresberichte  der  Geschichtswisseuschaft  "   since  1878,   "English  Historical  Review"  since  1885   (see Langlois,  "   Manuel  de   Bibliog.  Historique,"  1896),   and  combine  the   bibliographical notices   of   articles  of   the   "   National  Biography,"  where  the titles  are  usually  given   without  dates.

SOURCES. - It   would  be   impossible,  as  well  as  useless,  to   give   here  in detail  the   sources  of   the   contemporary  history  of   England.  I   confine  myself to   the   mention  of   the   principal  classes  of   documents.

- i.   Parliamentary  documents,  in   four  classes:  Public  Bills;  Reports  of Select  Committees;  Reports  of  Royal  Commissioners,  Inspectors,  and Others;  Accounts  and  Papers.  A   catalogue  of   each  year's  documents  is
*   The   number  of   labouring  men  entitled  to  vote  was  in   fact  reduced by   the  reform.  In  boroughs  such  as  Preston,  where  "   all  inhabitants "   had  the   vote,  and  in   the   numerous  boroughs  where  all   resident householders  or  all   "   freemen  "   could  vote,   the   labouring  classes  had   a   voice in   the   old   elections.- TR.

published  annually,  and  a   general  catalogue  for   a   series  of   years  appears at   intervals.  In   the   Boston  (Mass.)  Public  Library  catalogue,  1861,  there is   a   general   index  of   the   parliamentary  documents  to   1859;   later  catalogues have  supplementary  indices.  The  reports  of   committees  and  commissions are  among  the  best  sources  for   the  study   of   English  history.  The  acts of   Parliament  are  published  yearly,  under  the  title  ' '   Public  General Statutes."  The  public  acts  to   1869   are  collected  in   29   vols.,   with  the   title "   Statutes  at   Large."  All   the   more  important  public   acts  of   each  year  are also  published,  with  introductions  and  notes,  in   "   Patterson's  Practical Statutes."  The  debates  in   both  Houses  are  published  in   Hansard's  Debates and   in   the   London  Times.  Much  material  of   a  public   sort   is   to   be found  in   the   State  Trials.

2.   Official  Publications  of   Public  Departments. - A   list   of   these  will   be found   in   the   "   Statesman's  Year-book,"  which  has  appeared  annually since  1864.

3.   Histories  of   the   Year. - The   "   Annual  Register,"  an  annual  publication which   dates  back  to   the   eighteenth  century,  gives   the   history   of each  year   in   detail,  and  an  account  of   events  of   every   description.

4.   Reviews  and  Newspapers. - The  political  periodicals  are,  with  .the parliamentary  documents,  the  most  abundant  sources  of   direct  information for   the   political  history   of   the   nineteenth  century,  in   a  country  where parliamentary  life   and  the   liberty   of   the   press   have  never  been  interrupted. On   the   bibliog.  of   English  periodicals,  see  Langlois,  "   Manuel  de   Bibliog. Historique."    The  most  important  reviews  for  the  period  up   to   1832   are the   Edinburgh  Review  and  the  Quarterly  Review.     Poole's  indexes  to periodical  literature  since  1802  are   invaluable.

5.   Correspondence,  diaries,  speeches,  papers,  and   autobiographies  are  the sort   of   collections  most   found  in   England.   For   this   period   the   most   important are  :    Canning:  Correspondence  of   1820-27,  edited  by   E.   J.   Stapleton,  1887; Life,   by   A.   G.   Stapleton.- Lord  Holland,  Memoirs  of   the   Whig   Party,   1854. - Groker,   Corresp.  and  Diary,  3   vols.,  1884. - Romilly,  Life,   by   his   sons,  3 vols.,   1840. - Eldon,   Life,   by   Twiss,  3   vols.,   1844. - Lord   Liverpool,  Life,   by   C. D.   Yonge,  3   vols.,   1868.- Lord  Colchester,  Diary   and   Corresp.,  3   vols.,   1861. - Peel,   Life,   by   Parker,  2   vols.,   1899. - Lord  Ellenborough,  Pol.   Diary   of   182830,  2   vols.,   1881. - Earl  Grey,   Corresp.  with  William  IV.,   2   vols.,   1867. Lord  Melbourne,  Papers,  edited  by   Sanders,  1889;   Life,   by   Torrens,  2   vols., 1878. - Lord  Russell,  Recollections,  1875;   Life,   by   Sp.   Walpole,  2   vols.,   1889. - Lord Palmerston,  Life,   to   1846   by   Lord  Dalling,  3   vols.;   from  1846   to   1865 by   E.   Ashley,  2   vols;   gives   selections  from  speeches  and  despatches. Greville,  Journals,  (George  IV.   and  William  IV.),   2   vols.  (Victoria),  5   vols., filled   with   the   political  talk   of   the   time   in   official  circles.- Grattan,   by   his son,  5   vols.,   1839-46;  for   Irish  questions. - Bamford,  "   Passages  in   the   Life of   a   Radical,"  1844;   Homer,  edited  by   L.   Homer,  2   vols.,  1853;   for   the Radical  agitation.

WORKS. - FOR  GENERAL  ENGLISH  HISTORY. - S.R.Gardiner,  "A Student's History  of   England,"  vol.  iii.,   period   1689-1885,  new  edition,  1894   ;   a   very good   text-book,  detailed,  accurate,  and  impartial  (Green's  history  stops   at

1815). - Bright,  "   History  of   England  "   4   vols. The  "   National  Biography  "   (in   course  of   publication).    The  biograph-

ical   articles,  each  signed   by   the   author,  are  able   pieces   of   works,  notable for   their  accuracy  and  the   reliability  of   their  references  ;   some  have  the proportions  of   a  monograph.  See  the  biographies  of   the  sovereigns, ministers,  reformers,  and  agitators.

FOR  CONTEMPORARY  HISTORY.- Martineau  (Miss  Harriet),  "   Hist,  ot England,"  1816-46,  2vols.,  1849,   popular  in   England;  Am.  ed.   (enlarged), in   "   4   vols.- Walpole   (Spencer),  "   A   Hist,  of   England  since  1815,"   6   vols., 1878-90  ;   the   most  complete  history,  full   of   details  on   domestic  conditions  ; the  author  is   a   Radical  Liberal.-  GK   C.   Lewis,   "   Essays   on   the   Administrations of   Great  Britain  from  1783   to   1830,"  1864   ;   a   series  of   articles  originally published  in   the   Edinburgh  Review,  very  valuable  for   the  inner history  of   the   successive  ministries.

In   French.- H.   Eeynald,  "   Hist.  Con   temp,   de   1'Angleterre,"  very  unsatisfactory.

FOR  THE  ORGANIZATION  AND  PRACTICE  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT. - May (Erskine),  "Constitutional  Hist,  of  England,"  1876.- Todd  (Alpheus), "   On   Parliamentary  Government  in   England,"  2  vols.,  2dedit.,  1887-89  ; excellent  history  of   the  parliamentary  system.

In   French.- Fischel,  "   La   Constitution  d'Angleterre,  1863,  a  good   account.-  Glasson,   "   Histoire  du   Droit  et   des   Institutions  Politiques  de 1'Angleterre,  vol.   vi.,   1883. - Franqueville,  "   Le   Gouvernment  et   le   Parlement  Britanniques,"  3   vols.,  1887   ;   by   far   the   handiest  and  most  complete of   all  ;   also   gives   the   electoral  reforms  in   detail.

FOR  LOCAL  ADMINISTRATION  PREVIOUS  TO  THE  REFORM. - Gneist  (Rud.), "Das  Englische  Verwaltungsrecht  der  Gegenwart. - Selbstverwaltung, Kommunalverfassung  und  Verwaltungsgerichte  in  England."  The work  in   its   first   form,   under  a   single   title,   appeared  in   1857-60;  it   has been  revised  and   published  in   several  editions,  in   three  parts   under  different titles,   and   the   whole  translated  into  English  ;   one  of   the   volumes  from  an old   edition  has  been  translated  into  French.  It   gives   the  most  concise and  the   most  complete  description  of   English  local  institutions.

FOR  THE  HISTORY  OF   LABOUR  MOVEMENTS.- Webb  (Sidney  and  Beatrice), "   Hist,   of   Trade  Unionism,"  1894   ; followed  by   a   detailed  bibliography  ;   one of   the   most  instructive  historical  works  of   our  time,   containing  an  unusual quantity  of   fresh  information,  not  only   on  the  trade  unions,  but  on   the whole  political  activity  of   the   workingmen. - Von  Sehulze-Gaevernitz,  "   Zum Socialen  Frieden,"  2   vols.,   1890,   gives   a  practical  account  of   the   history of   the   "   political  social  education  of   the   English  people   in   the   nineteenth century  "   ; from  the   standpoint  of   the   doctrine  of   liberal  political  economy. FOR  ECONOMIC  TRANSFORMATION  IN  ENGLISH  SOCIETY.- W.  Cunningham, "   The   Growth  of   English  Industry  and   Commerce  in   Modern  Times,"  1892, with  a   general  bibliog.  of   economic  history,  the   clearest  and  most  accurate general  account.

ON   TAXATION. - A.   Wagner,  "   Finanzwissenschaft,"  1887;  gives   a   bibliog. and  a  general  account. - S.   Dowell,  "   History  of   Taxation  and  Taxes  in England,"  1884   (since  revised).

ON  IRELAND. - de   Pressense,  "   L'Irlande  et   1'Angleterre,"  1889   ;   a   popular work,  very  partial  to   the   Irish. - Bryce,   "   Two  Centuries  of   Irish  History." - Sigerson,  "   Hist,  of   Irish   Land  Tenure."

## CHAPTER  III.

## ENGLAND  BETWEEN  THE  TWO  REFORMS (1832-67).

New  Conditions  of   Political  Life. - The   electoral  reform  of   1832 marks  the   end  of   England's  old   regime.  There  were  no  more representatives  chosen  by   patrons.  The  great   industrial  cities entered  into  political  life.  The  House  of   Commons  became,  if not  much  less  aristocratic,  at   least  much  more  representative, than  before.

The  change  very  soon  made  itself  manifest  by   outward  signs; increase  in   the   number  of   contested  elections,  in   the   length   of the   sessions  of   the   Commons,  in   the   number  of   members  present at   a   sitting,   in   the   number  of   volumes  of   reports  printed   for   the House  (an   average  of   31   a   year   from  1824   to   1832,   50   from  1832 to  1840),   in   the   number  of   petitions,  which  finally   became  so great   that   they   had   to   be   turned  over  to   a   Committee  on   Public Petitions  without  debate  (1839).

The  publication  of   debates  increased  also,   though  it   existed only   on  sufferance;  as   late   as  1832   the   Commons  refused  to   publish the   votes  of   the   representatives,  and   when  O'Connell  made them  public  in   Ireland,  his   act  was   denounced  as  a  violation  of Parliamentary  privilege.  By   the   rules  of   the   House,  according to   the   mediaeval  principles  embodied  in   them,  the  sittings  and votes  should  be   secret.  But   the   need  of   publicity  overcame  this tradition;  the   Parliament  building  having  been  destroyed  by   fire in   1834,   new   halls   were   built   with   galleries   for   the   reporters  and the   public.  Then  the   House  of   Commons  itself  decided  to   publish division  lists   (1836)  - that   is   to   say,   the   votes  of   the   members on   both   sides   of   contested  questions. bers

The  ancient  form  of   procedure  in   the   House  of   Commons was  preserved,  except  the   manner  of   voting  in   case  of   division, which  was  thereafter  done  by   both  sides  going   from  the   hall   into the   lobbies,  and  on  the   way   back  passing  between  the   tellers. Practical  discussion  of   financial  matters  and   of   details  and   pro-

posed   amendments  of   bills  was  still   carried  on   in   "   committee  of the   whole  House,"  with  a   chairman;  the   discussion  of   the   general principle  of   bills   and   test  votes  on   their   enactment  were  reserved to   the   official  sitting,   presided  over,   in   accordance  with   old   custom, by   the   Speaker  in   his   wig,   with   the   mace  on   the   table.  Each representative  continued  to  speak   from  his   seat;  each  had  the right   to   present  a   motion  and   to   speak   as   long   as   he   wished  (the English  would  have  no  shutting  off  of   debate.)  In   practice the   Commons  rarely  passed  any   but   the   measures  presented  by the   ministry - and   this   is   still   true  at   the   present  time.

But,   while  preserving  its   ancient  forms,  the   House  of   Commons assumed  a   new  activity.  Elected  by   a  more  numerous and  more  independent  body   of   voters,  it   inclined  toward  a   policy of   reform  and  real  Parliamentary  control.  The  old   traditional parties   dropped  the   names  of   Whig   and   Tory;   the   Whigs,   uniting with   the   Radicals,  called  themselves  Liberals;  and   the   Tories adopted  the   name  of   Conservatives.  The  leader  of   the   Conservatives, Sir   Robert  Peel,   declared,  in   an  election  manifesto  of   1834, that   he   accepted  the   reform  as   "   a   final   and   irrevocable  settlement of   a   great   constitutional  question  .  .  .  which  no   friend  to   the peace  and   welfare  of   the   country  would  attempt  to   disturb  either by   direct  or   by   insidious  means."  The  English  Conservatives have  always  followed  this  policy,  fighting  a  reform  before  it   is passed,  but   accepting  it   afterward  and   never  trying   to   induce  a reaction  to   overthrow  it.   Before  the   reform  the   Conservatives, maintained  by   the   gentry  and   the   clergy,   had   had   the   upper   hand. Since  the   reform  the   majority  has  been  more  often  with  the Liberals,  maintained  by   the   commercial  classes  and   'the   Dissenters. In   the   34   years   from  1832   to   1866   the   'Liberals  held   power for   25   years. ers.

The  government  ceased  to  treat  the   press  as  an  enemy;  the stamp   duty   was  reduced  in   1836   to   I   penny  a   copy,  and   then   abolished altogether   in   1855.   The   number  of   newspapers  increased very   little.  England  is   still   a   country  of   few   newspapers  with large   circulation.  The   number  of   stamps  sold   went  up   from  36,000,000  in   1836   to   53,000,000  in   1838,   and   107,000,000  in   1855. Press  prosecutions  became  rare,  and   the   practical  freedom  of   discussion was   complete.

The  Tory  ministries  had  abandoned  the  Parliamentary system;  the  Liberal  ministries  restored  it.  The  custom became  settled  that  the   leader  of   the   party   having  a  majority in   the   House  of   Commons  should  undertake  the  formation

of   a   ministry  and   that   the   ministry  should  govern  without  interference from   the   King,   in   accordance  with   the   phrase   now become  classic  :   "   The   King   reigns,   but   does   not   govern."

William  IV.  tried  once  again  to  make  use  of   his  prerogative to  take  ministers  of   his   own  choosing.  The  House of   Commons  elected  in   1832   under  the  new  electoral  system, had  a   large   Liberal  majority,  the   Liberal  ministry  under  Lord Grey   remaining  in   power.  A   division  arose  in   the   Cabinet  on the   question  of   the   revenues  of   the   Irish  Church,  and   the   ministry was   reconstructed  under  Melbourne.  But   the   King   did   not like   the   Melbourne  ministry,  particularly  Brougham,  the   Lord Chancellor.  Lord  Althorp,  the  leader  of   the  Liberal  party in  the  House  of  Commons,  having  inherited  a  peerage, the  King  dismissed  the  ministry  by   a  simple  letter  to Melbourne,  saying  that  he  not  longer  had  confidence,  in the  stability  of   the  ministry.  Peel  was  then  asked  to form  a  ministry,  which  he  reluctantly  consented  to   do.  It was  a  minority  ministry.  Peel  dissolved  the  House,  but failed  to   obtain  a   majority,  though   he   gained   a   number  of   seats. He  tried  to  carry  on  the   government  in   presence  of   the   new Parliament;  but  being   left   four  times  in   a   minority  he   resigned. In   doing   so   he   declared  that  "   according  to   the   practice,  the principle,  and   the   letter  of   the   Constitution,  a   government  should not  persist   in   directing  the   national  affairs  after  a   loyal   attempt, contrary  to   the   decided  opinion  of   the   House  of   Commons,  even when  it   possesses  the   confidence  of   the   King   and   a   majority  in the   House  of   Lords."  Thus  was  the   principle  of   Parliamentary supremacy  formulated  by   the   leader  of   the   Conservative  party (1835).  It   has   never  since  ceased  to   be   regularly  applied  in England.

William  IV.   was  soon  succeeded  by   his   niece  Victoria  (1837), who  during  her   long   reign   has   reduced  her   prerogative  to   charging the   leader   of   the   majority   in   the   House  of   Commons  with   the task  of   forming  a  ministry.  The  old   theory   of   the   balance  of power  between  the   three  powers,  King,   Lords,  Commons,  has been  replaced  by   the   theory   of   the   balance  of   power   between the  parties.  The  party  having  the  majority  of  the  Commons should  form  the   ministry,  because  it   has   the   confidence of   the   majority  of   the  voters.  When  a  ministry  loses  its majority  in   the   House,  it   must  resign   the   power  to   the   party   which has   acquired  that  confidence.  But  a   defeated  party   holds  itself together  in   readiness  to   take   the   power  again,   under  a   chief  who

is   called   the   leader  of   the   opposition.  The   two  parties   thus   form two  organizations,  one   in   the   exercise  of   power,  the   other  ready to   be   called  on  at   any   minute.  Between  the   two  the   voters  hold the   scales,   and   determine,  through   the   House  of   Commons,  which shall  have  control.*

Since  1832   the   Liberals  and   Conservatives  have  alternated  in control  of   the   Commons,  according  to   changes  in   public   opinion. From  this  practice  an   inference  has   been  drawn  that   the   English Parliamentary  system  rests  on  a   division  of   the   nation  into two  well-defined  parties,  and  two  only,   which  must  alternate  in power.  In   reality   the   parties   have  never  been  sharply  defined; the   Conservatives  were  divided  into  two  sets,   for   and  against free   trade,   in   1846,   as   in   1827   they   had   been  divided  for   and against  Catholic  Emancipation.  ,The  Liberals  were  divided  on the   army  question  in   1852,   on   the   Chinese  War  in   1857,   and   on electoral  reform  in   1866.  In   all   these  cases  the   dissenting  portion allied   itself   temporarily  with   the   opposition,  and   the   power was  exercised  by   a   coalition  instead  of   a  majority.  Moreover, in   addition  to   the   two  great   parties,   there  were  formed  two  new groups,  the   Radical  party  and  the   Irish  party,  which  ordinarily voted  with  the  Liberals,  but  remained  independent  of   them. These  members  sat  neither  on  the   left   nor  on  the   right   in   the House;  they   remained  on  the   cross  benches.

Thus  after  the   reform  of   1832   was  the  Parliamentary  system fully   established - a   new  system,   for   it   has   had   full   play   only since  the   accession  of   Queen   Victoria.  And  thus  was  established the   alternation  of   parties   founded  on   the   rule   of   the   majority, but   with   a   mechanism  much  less   precise   than  classic theory  assumes.

Administrative  Reforms  (1833-40). - The  Liberal  party,   having succeeded  to  power,  refused  all   further  Parliamentary  reform, and  occupied  itself  solely   with  reforming  the  administrative organization.  There  were  still  in   England,  outside  of   the   incorporated towns,   only   two   forms  of   territorial  division - the   county and   the   parish.  All   those  local  affairs  which  spring   up   little  by little   with   the   growth   of   civilization - poor-relief,  assessment  of

*   The   following  is   the   series  of   ministries  under  the   first   Reform  Act: Grey,   then  Melbourne  (Liberal)  1832-34  ;   Peel  (Conservative),  1834-35  ; Melbourne  (Lib.),  1835-41  ; Peel  (Cons.),  1841-46  ; Russell  (Lib.),  1846-52  ; Derby  (Cons.),  1852   ;   Aberdeen  (coalition,  Peelites  and  Liberals),  1852-55  ; Palmerston  (Liberal),  1855-58;  Derby  (Cons.),  1858-59  ;   Palmerston,  then Russell  (Lib.),   1859-66  ;   Derby,  then  Disraeli  (Cons.),  1866-68.

taxes,  public   health,  roads,   and   police  - were  given   over  either to  the   parish   authorities,  or,  as  was  usually  the   case,  to   the justices   of   the   peace,  who   governed  rural  England  free   from  control either   by   the   central  government  or   by   the   taxpayers.  The cities  and   the   boroughs  remained  outside  of   these  divisions,  and constituted  independent  districts;  but  they   were  governed  by close  or  self-perpetuating  corporations,  made  up   of   privileged local  families;  even  the   police   duties  were  performed  by   "constables," residents  of   the   place   serving   without  regular   pay.   The Liberals  denounced  this  system  as   incoherent,  feeble,  and  arbitrary.

It   was  not   in   the   nature  of   the   English   Liberals  to   undertake any  sweeping  reform;  but   they   accomplished  in   a   few   years  several partial   reforms  which  were  sufficient  to   transform  the   old administrative  system.  The  Tories  had,   in   1829,   created  a   special police   service  for   London - that   is   to   say,   for   the   region   lying within  a   certain  radius  from  Charing  Cross.  It   was  made  up   of policemen,  with  regular  pay,  military  organization,  and  discipline; but   out   of   respect   for   English   traditions  the   old   name  of constable  was  preserved,  and   they   were  given,   in   place   of   arms,  a short  club,   which  looked  like   a   mere  form,   but   could  be   used  to break  heads.  Other  administrative  reforms  now  followed:

First.  The  Liberals,  under  the  Grey  ministry,  reformed the   system  of   poor  relief.  England  was  spending  enormous sums  every  year   for   the   relief  of   paupers;  £8,600,000  in   the   year 1833.  But  the   charitable  intention  of   the   nation  was   badly   carried into   practice.  The   administration  of   the   poor   law  was nominally  in   the   hands  of   the   parish   overseers:  these  were  the church  wardens,  with  two  or  more  other  persons  appointed  by the   justices  of   the   peace.  The  overseers  were  subject  to   the orders  of   any   justice   of   the   peace  as  regards   the   persons  to   receive aid   and   the   amount  of   aid.   The   whole  work  of   relief  was managed  without  any   intelligent  system  or  central  control  to check  the   vagaries  of   local  justices  and  overseers.  Aid  was given   not  only   to   the   sick   and   aged,   but   also   to   the   young  and strong  in   the   full   exercise  of   their  ordinary  employment.  Anybody who   was  refused  favour  by   the   overseers  could  usually   find some  benevolent  justice   ready   to   make  the   requisite  order  for   an allowance.  The  justices  had  standards  of   their  own  for   determining how   much   an   English   labourer  ought   to   have   for   the   support of   himself  and  family;  and  if   a   man's  wages   fell   below  this standard,  they   gave  an  order  for   an  allowance  from  the   parish

rates  to   make  up   the   deficiency.  The   larger   the   family   the   larger the   allowance.

This  method,  instead  of   relieving  pauperism,  was  really   increasing it.   The   labourers  had   come  to   regard   public   alms,   not  as  a provision  for   relief  of   misfortune,  but   as  a   right   of   all   poor  people at   all   times.  They   were  taught   to   depend   on   the   rates  instead of   depending  on  their  own  industry;  they   were  all   becoming paupers  in   spirit.   The   few   who   struggled  to   maintain  their  selfrespect  were  sooner  or   later  forced  to   go   with  the   crowd;  for employers  expected  their  labourers  to   apply   for   allowances,  and found  it   easy   to   hire   all   they   needed  at   very   low   wages.   Wages were,   in   fact,   declining,  and   allowances  increasing,  especially  in the   case  of   the   agricultural  labourers.

The  burden  of   the   poor  rates  fell   on  all   income  from  lands and   buildings  (including  the   tithe)   in   each  parish.  So   far   as   the land  classes  were  concerned  the  system  of   allowances  was simply   a   highly   vicious  method  of   supporting  the   farm  labourers  : the   more  they   paid   in   allowances  the   less   they   paid   in   wages. So   far,   however,  as   the   rates  fell   on   the   tithe   of   the   parson  or the   patron,  and   on  occupiers  of   houses  who   were  not  employers, the   system  of   allowances  had   the   very  unjust   effect  of   throwing a   portion   of   the   wages  of   farm   hands  on   the   shoulders  of   people who  had  nothing  to   do   with  farming.

There  were  cases  of   local  irregularity  and   hardship  for   which the   law   afforded  no  remedy.  Overseers  had   the   right   to   prevent any   labourer  from  settling   in   their  parish   unless  he   gave  security against  becoming  a  charge  on  the   rates.  (This   acted  as  a  serious check   on   the   free   movement  of   labourers  from   regions   where employment  was  scarce  to  regions  where  new  industries  were calling  for   additional  labourers.  Again,   the   overseers  had   the right   to   hand  over  pauper  children  to  employers  as   "   apprentices " - a   useful  provision  under  proper  safeguards,  but   one  that led   to   much  cruelty   because  there  was  no  care  taken  to   protect these  unfortunates  against  the   selfish  avarice  of   factory  owners.

A   commission  of   inquiry  appointed  in   1833   disclosed  an  appalling condition  of   affairs.  Poor  rates  were  so   heavy   that,   in some  parishes,  they   were  causing  farms  to   be   abandoned,  as  no man  could  be   found  to   till   them  rent-free,  on  condition  of   paying the   poor  rate;  and   yet   the   country  seemed  to   be   filled  with   cases of   unrelieved  misery  and  hardship.  The  dismayed  Parliament decided  upon  a  sweeping  and  unpopular  reform.  They   passed the   law   of   1834,   which  established  three  main  provisions:  1st,

it   set   forth   the   principle   that   no  more   help   should  be   given   in   the paupers'  own  homes,  except  to   the   sick   and   aged;   2d,   that   each healthy  person  asking  for   aid   should  be   tested  by   the   offer  of   a place   in   the   workhouse,  where  he   would  be   taken  care  of,   but obliged  to   work  and   submit  to   a   certain  discipline;  3d,   that   several parishes   should  have  the   right   to   form  themselves  into  a union,  for   the   purposes  of   the   poor   law;   the   union  to   have  a single   board  of   guardians  and   a   uniform  poor  rate.

The  new  law  seemed  very  hard  to  the  poor,  but  it produced  the   desired  effect.  Many   workmen,  unwilling  to  go to  the  workhouse,  gave  up  asking  for  help;  wages  rose gradually,  and  the   burden  of   poor  relief  was  lightened  (four millions  sterling  in   1837).  This  was  also  the   beginning  of   an administrative  organization;  between  the   county  and   the   parish an   intermediate  body   had   arisen,   with   its   own  elected  officers  and its   own  paid   employees,  exercising  its   powers  independently  of the   justices   of   the   peace.   This   was  the   first   break  in   the   English system   of   gratuitous  and   aristocratic  administration.  Also a   first   step   was  taken  toward  centralization  by   the   institution  of a   central  board  of   commissioners  with  large   powers  of   control over  the   local  administration  of   the   poor   law.

Second.  A   similar  system  was  created  for   public   works;  the parishes  were  grouped  into  districts  empowered  to   build  and maintain  highways,  with  inspectors  chosen  by   the   inhabitants, under  direction  of   a   central  bureau  in   London.  They   gave  over some  of   the   roads  as   turnpikes,  to   be   built   by   private   individuals, who  repaid  themselves  by   charging  tolls.  The  railroads,  however, were   left   to   private   management,  the   state   interfering  only to   vote  the   act   of   expropriation  for   the   land   required. ever,

Third.  There  were  also  unions  formed  for   purposes  of   health and   cleanliness,  which  were  administered  by   boards  of   health.

Fourth.  The  municipalities  of   cities  and  boroughs  were  reformed by   the   Municipal  Corporations  Act  (1835),  which  did away  with  the   "   close   "   corporations,  gave   to   all   taxpayers  the right   of   voting   for   the   city   council,  and   organized  all   the   city governments  on  the   same  model,  with  a  mayor,  aldermen,  and councillors.

Fifth.  The   law   of   1836   created  an  entirely  new  set  of   civil officers,  the   county  registrars  and  the   registrar  general,  whose duty   was  to   register  the   facts  relating  to  population,  births, deaths,  and   marriages.  Thus  was  established  a  regular  lay   system of   civil   registration.  The   church  officials  continued  to   make-

their  records,  but   it   became  possible   to   perform  a   marriage  without their   intervention,  by   directly   addressing  the   lay   registrar.

Sixth.  Education  was  entirely  given   up   to   private  enterprise. The  greater  number  of   children  did   not  go   to   school.  It   was one  of   the   Liberal  doctrines  that  the   state  should  not  trouble itself  about  education.  The  first  departure  from  this  principle was  a   grant   of   £20,000  to  pri-ate  societies  for   the purpose  of   founding  schools  (1833).  Then  Parliamentary  committees were  appointed  to   investigate  the   question  (1834-37). Finally,  in   1839,   the   ministry   brought  forward  a   bill   for   the   creation of   a   central  organ  of   supervision,  the   "   Committee  of   the Privy  Council  for  Education,"  and  the  appointment  of   some school  inspectors.  The  Lords  rejected  it.  It   could  not  pass without  the   conditions  exacted  by   the   Anglican  party,  which  regarded the   school   as   an  adjunct   of   the   Church;  the   inspectors must  be   approved  by   the   bishop,   and   must  report  to*   him.  The school  appropriation  increased  little  by   little, . but  very  slowly (£164,000  in   1851,   £800,000  in   1861).

Seventh.  The  reform  in   the   penal   law   consisted  in   abolishing the   pillory   and   the   whipping-post;  there  was  also   a   reform  made in   the   prisons.

Eighth.  The  reform  in   the   postal   service  was  made  in   1839. Instead  of   the   high   and   variable  rate  of   money  charge,   payable by   the   receiver  to   the   postman  who   delivered  the   letter,   the   new law   established  the   postage  stamp  at   a   fixed  and   moderate  rate, paid   by   the   sender  (the   rate  was  reduced  in   1840   to   one  penny). Men  who  were  experienced  in   the   postal   service  had   declared  this reform  impracticable,  the   director  explaining  that  the   carriers would  no   longer   be   able   to   carry  all   the   letters  and   that   the   General Post   Office   would  sink   beneath  the   burden.

The  result  of   all   these  reforms  was  to   create  in   England  an administration  which,  though  still  incomplete,  was  organized  on new  principles.  The  old   local  powers,  controlled  by   the   gentry, existed  only   as   ornaments;  the   justices   of   the   i   eace  alone  retained any  real   power.  But   in   addition  to   these  were  established  elective councils  and   paid   officials  of   the   unions  which  now  took charge  of   business  affairs.  At   their  head  was  constituted  a   new power  at   London,  the   Local  Government  Board,  the   foundation of   an   institution  which  has   become  a  sort  of   Ministry  of   the   Interior. Thus   the   local   administration  of   the   country  passed   little by   little   out   of   the   hands  of   the   aristocracy  into   those  of   special bodies  of   elective  boards  and   salaried  officials;  but   these  officials

were  appointed  by   the   local  authorities,  not,   as   in   France,  by   the central  government.

The   Labour  Agitation  of   the   Trades  Unions  (1832-34). - Industrial crises,   occurring  from   time   to   time,   produced  periods   of misery  and  falling   wages.  The  years  preceding  the   reform  of Parliament  were  a   time  of   great   suffering  in   the   manufacturing cities,   the   memory  of   which  is   perpetuated  in   literature  by   Dickens' "   Hard  Times  "   and  Disraeli's  "   Sybil,"   both  of   which  set forth  the   misery   and   despair   of   the   working   people.  Official  investigation into   the   causes  of   the   cholera  epidemic,  also   into   the condition  of   the   women  and   children  in   the   mines,   disclosed  the most  appalling  state  of   wretchedness  and  mortality:  people, packed  together  in   narrow  quarters;  in   Manchester  a   tenth of   the   population  living   in   dark  and  filthy   cellars,  the   children sleeping   on   the   damp   bricks;   in   London  families  of   eight persons  crowded  into  one  small  room  ; in   a   parish   of   Dorsetshire an  average  of   thirty-six  persons  to   a   house  ;   wages   from  eight   to ten  shillings  a  week  for   a   family,  in   a   time  when  wheat  was very   dear;  payment  of   workmen  by   the  truck  system,  which forced  them  to   take,   in   place   of   their   wages,  provisions  at   extortionate prices   for   the   benefit   of   the   employer.  In   the   official  reports of   these  conditions,  two  socialistic  theorists,  Marx  and   Engels,   found  many  practical  examples  for   their  purposes.

The  workmen  had  tried  to   better  themselves  by   forming  associations. Already   they   had   succeeded  in   forming   syndicates  of men  of   the   same  trade  to   discuss  the   terms  of   labour  with   the   employers. They   wished  to   develop   these   into   large   associations. The  idea  started  with  a  philanthropic  reformer  by   the  name of   Owen,  proprietor  of   a   great   cotton  mill.  After  having   transformed his   own  establishment  into   a   model  community,  Owen began  to   preach   co-operation,  urging  workmen  to   associate  for the   purpose  of   producing  on  their  own  account  instead  of   producing for   the   profit   of   a   capitalist.

As   early   as  1824   Owen  had   founded  "   co-operative  societies  " which,  since  1829,   held  congresses  of   delegates;  they   had   a   cooperative review,   and   had   brought   into   use  expressions  that   have become  a  part  of   the   workingman's  vocabulary:  co-operation, productive  class,   fair   value  of   labour,  principles  of   equity,   and even  the   word  socialist.  From  Owen's  preaching  the   workmen got   the   impression  of   a   common  interest  between  all   labourers and  the   idea   that   they   should  work  together.

They   tried  to   form  associations  of   all   the   workmen  in   each   par-

ticular  trade,   and   a   combination  of   all   the   trades.  The   movement, drawn  aside  into  politics   by   the   reform  agitation  in   1831,   became again   purely   industrial  in   its   objects.  Owen  'had   just   made  an attempt  at   conducting  a   bank  which  was  to   issue  notes  in   terms of   labour  instead  of   coin.  The   bank  had   proved   a   failure  (1832). He   founded  a   Society   for   National  Regeneration,  to   obtain  a   law fixing   the   working  day   at   eight   hours,   so   that   workmen  might have  time  for   study   (December,  1833).  Then  he   founded  the Great  National  Trades  Union,*  an  association  of   all   trades  under the   form  of   a   federation  of   lodges,   copied   after   the   Free   Masons. These  lodges   were  associations  of   workingmen  of   one  trade,   but organized  with  rites;  a  new  member  was  initiated  in   a  secret meeting  presided  over  by   the   figure   of   Death,  where  he   had   to submit  to   a   test  with  swords  and   axes  and   take  an  oath.  This was  not  a   new  custom;  the   novelty  lay   in   admitting  into   lodges peasants  and   even  women.  .The  "   Trades  Union  "   sent  out  missionaries and   rose  rapidly   to   a   membership  of   half   a   million. The  object   was  to   organize  a   general   strike  which  should  force Parliament  to  agree   to   the   eight-hour  day.

This  agitation  struck  terror  to   the   hearts  of   manufacturers  and politicians.  The  former  retaliated  by   a   league   of   employers ;   they bound  themselves  to  refuse  employment  to  any  workman  belonging to   a   union;  before  accepting  a  workman  they   must  demand a   written  guarantee  that   he   belonged  to   no   trade  union. The  two  parties  were  now  pitted   against  each  other,   the   work-men striking   to   force   employers  to   raise   wages  or  shorten  hours, the   employers  trying   to   starve  out  the   unions  by   the   lock-out,  or closing  of   the   factories. mand

The  government,  trembling  at   these  demonstrations,  consulted an  authority  on  political  economy,  Nassau  Senior,  who  advised exceptional  laws  against  the   woddngmen.  The  Liberal  ministry was  unwilling  to   violate  "   constitutional  liberties  ";   but   the   King himself  urged  them  to  take  action  against  the  workingmen. Melbourne,  the  prime  minister,  announced  in   the   name  of   his colleagues  the   view  that  the   methods  followed  by   the   unions were  criminal;  they   were,  he   declared,  "illegal  conspiracies," punishable  in   the   name  of   the   law   (August,  1833).   They   began by   prosecuting  the   members  of   trade  unions  for   having  taken oath  to   a   society   not  recognised  by   law.  The  most  famous  of

*   The   Trades  Union,  a   fabulous  association  of   Owen's,  to   unite  all   trades, must  not  be   confounded  with  the   trade  unions,  special   syndicates  of   each trade,   which  still  exist.

these  cases  was  that  of   six   Dorsetshire  labourers.  They   were peasants  who  had   formed  a   "   friendly   society   of   farm   labourers," to   try   and   maintain  a   wage  of   ten  shillings  a   week,   the   farmers having  reduced  it   to   seven  ; they   had   adopted  the   initiatory  ceremony of   a   lodge   belonging  to   the   Trades  Union.  They   were  sentenced to   seven  years'   transportation  for   taking   illegal   oaths (March,  1834),  and  the   government  ordered  them  shipped  off without  delay.*

The  National  Trades  Union,  aided  by   other  general  associations, organized   an  enormous  meeting  to   send  a   petition   to   the ministry  to   plead   for   the   condemned  men.  In   a   place   near   London the   workingmen  met,  grouped  themselves  according  to trades,  and   marched  across  the   city,   led   by   a   Dissenting  parson on   horseback;  the   builders  had  stopped  work  (August,  1834). Then  they   appointed  a   special   committee  to   obtain  the   release  of the   condemned  men,

But  these  great  general  associations,  made  up   mainly  of   the poorest  labourers,  weavers,  spinners,  miners,  and  journeymen, had   not  money  enough  to   maintain  strikes ;   so   the   strikes  quickly failed  for   want  of   funds.  In   August,   1834,   Owen  transformed  the Trades  Union  into  a   "   British  and  Foreign  Association  of   Industry, Humanity,  and   Learning,"  having   reduced  its   aim   to   the humanitarian  one  of   establishing  the   "   new  moral  world,"  to   try and  reconcile  the   classes  of   society.  The   prosecutions  went  on. At   Glasgow,  in   Scotland,  five   cotton  spinners  were  condemned to   seven  years'   transportation  (1837),   and   the   House  of   Commons named  a  committee  to   investigate  the   legality  of   unions.  The workingmen,  losing   heart,  gave  up   the   great   general  struggle  of the   united  labouring  classes.

The   Chartist  Agitation  (1837-48). - The  Radical  party,  when  it joined   the   Whigs   for   the   demonstrations  of   1831,   had   counted  on preparing  for   radical  reform  by   universal  suffrage.  Since  1832, it   had   sometimes  supported,  sometimes  attacked,  the  Liberal ministry.  After  the  accession  of   Queen  Victoria  the   Radicals demanded  electoral  reform.  Russell  replied  that  electoral  re-

*   The   statutes  forbidding  combinations  of   workingmen  were  repealed  in 1824.  But  there  was  still   an  act   in   force  which  made  it   a   crime  to   take  or administer  oaths  not  contemplated  by   the   law.  Combinations  in   restraint of   trade  were  forbidden  by   the   common  law  ;   and  the   projected  combination of   the   labourers  was  held  to   be   in   restraint  of   trade.  The  Dorsetshire labourers  were  prosecuted  for   their  breach  of   the  statute  against illegal   oaths.  They   were  pardoned  at   the   end   of   two  years. - TR.

form  was  accomplished,  and  the  Commons  supported  him, 500   to   22.

The  Radicals  once  more  began  to  stir   up   public   interest  for electoral  reform;  they   arranged  with  workingmen  excited  by   the great   association  movement  of   1834.   Owen's  disciples  had   tried to   obtain  a   social  reform  by   private   associations  among  workingmen; having   failed,   they   wished  to   enforce  reform  through legislation.  They   must,  therefore,  control  the   majority  of   the House  of   Commons  by   winning  over  a  majority  of   the   electors. In   order  to   do   this   they   must  obtain  the   suffrage   for   the   workingmen- electoral  reform  being   the   primary  condition  of   social reform.  They   therefore  revived  the   Radical  policy   of   1816.

The  old   Radicals,  who   were  still   individualists,  and   the   Socialistic labourers,  or   Owenites,  came  to   an  understanding  by   a   conference. The   movement  was  managed  by   the   London  Labourers' Association,  a   political  society   founded  in   1837   by   an   Owenite workingman,  Lovett,  an  old   ally   of   the   Radicals.  They   decided to   adopt   the   Radical  policy,   to   present   to   Parliament  a   petition   for universal  suffrage,  and   to   back  it   up   with  great   demonstrations. The  petition,  drawn  up   in   London  (by   either  Lovett  or   Place, the   former  Radical  leader)   and   published  in   May,   1838,   consisted of   six   demands  :   universal  suffrage,  secret  ballot,   pay   for   representatives, abolition   of   the   property  qualification,  annual  elections, and,   finally,   division  of   the   country   into   equal   electoral  districts, in   order  to   insure  the   equal   distribution  of   seats.  This  petition was  known  as  the  People's  Charter.  The  "   six  points  of   the Charter  "   were  simply   a   repetition  of   the   demands  made  by   the Radicals  from  1816  to   1819.   Chartism  was  a   combination  of   the old   Radical  party  and  the   new  Socialist  workingman's  party.

The  Chartist  leaders  laboured  to   obtain  as  many  signatures  to the   Charter  as  possible,  and  at   the   same  time  to   stir   up   public feeling   by   great   public   demonstrations.  The  Chartist  agitation lasted  ten  years   (1838-48),  with  intervals  of   quiet.   Its   greatest activity  coincided  with  the  periods  of   industrial  depression. Labourers  out  of   work  formed  the   great   body   of   those  making Chartist  demonstrations.  These  took  place   mainly  in   London, and   in   the   manufacturing  regions  of   the   west  (Liverpool,  Manchester, southern  Wales)   and   in   the   interior  (Leeds,   Sheffield).

There  were  three  great   Chartist  movements,  marked  by   three huge   petitions  (1838-39,  1842,   1848).

First.  The   agitation  began   after  the   drawing  up   of   the   Charter (May,   1838).  Great  mass-meetings  were  held  near  Manchester,

some  at  night   by   torchlight.  The  principal  orator,  Stephens (formerly  a   Dissenting  minister),  declared  as   the   principle  of   the Charter  "   every   free   man  who  breathes  God's  free  air   or   treads God's  free   earth  has   the   right   to   a   home."  He   called  on   his   followers to   arm  themselves  with  pikes   and  guns.  The  Tories  demanded exceptional  laws   as   in   1819,   but   the   Liberal  ministry   refused, Russell  declaring  (October,  1838)   that   the   people   had   the right   of   assembling  and  of   discussion.  The  speech  from  the throne  in   1839   announced  that   the   government  discarded  all   repressive legislation,   "   trusting  to   the   good   sense  and   the   wise disposition  of   the   people."

The  Chartists,  left   free   to   act,   organized  a   representative  congress of   workingmen  to   direct  the   movement;  they   called  it   the "   National  Convention,"  also  the   "   Workingmen's  Parliament." It   met   in   London  (February,  1839)   a*   the   same  time  as   Parliament, and   gave   its   attention  first   to   presenting  the   petition   for universal  suffrage.  The  petition  was  presented  with  1,200,000 signatures.  The  members  of   the   House  of   Commons  were  little inclined  to   favour  its   demands;  they   refused  by   a   large   majority, after  debate,  to   take  it   into   consideration.

In   the   "   National  Convention  "   some  of   the   Chartist  delegates disputed  over  the   further  course  to   be   followed,  and   they   divided into   two  parties.  One,   which  refused  to  accept  anything  but pacific   action  by   legal   measures,  was  composed  mainly  of   the most  prosperous  workingmen ;   those  belonging  to   the   best  organized trades   united  in   the   Trade  Union  at   London,  under  the leadership  of   Lovett,  the   Owenite.  The  other,   which  was  called the   "   party  of   physical   force,"   was  made  up   of   the   mass  of   poorer labourers  (weavers,  spinners,  etc.),   led   by   two  Irish  orators, O'Connor  and  O'Brien.  O'Connor,  a  man  of   gigantic  height,   fine presence,  and   powerful  voice,   and   very  excitable  temperament  (he died  a   maniac),  had   been   a   Radical  Irish  member  of   Parliament  in 1832,   and   in   1837   had   just   founded  the   London  Democratic  Association and   the   Northern  Star,   a   paper  which  became  the   official organ  of   the   Chartists.  He   announced  his   intention  of   appealing "   to   unshorn  chins  and   calloused  hands,"  and   reproached  Lovett and   his   followers  with   not   being   true  workingmen.  O'Brien,  also a   Radical,  had   edited  an   illegal   newspaper,  and   had   imbibed  a little   communism  in   translating  the   history   of   Babeuf  from  the French.*

*   Seep.   141.

Actual  violence  was,   however,  confined  to  a   few  local  outbreaks. At   Birmingham,  whither  the  Chartist  Convention  had transported  itself,   there  was  a   night   meeting,  a   riotous  attack  on the   police,   a   procession,  followed  by   the   destruction  of   a   number of   houses  and   shops.   The  ministry,  alarmed  at   this   outbreak, had   a   law  passed  permitting  cities  to   organize  a  regular police   force  like   that   in   London;  they   had   the   Chartist  leaders arrested  and  condemned  for  seditious  writings  and  speeches. There  was  only   one  real  attempt  at   insurrection,  the   attack  on Newport  in   Wales  by   an  armed  band.

Second.  In   1842   wages   had   been  lowered  and   the   workingmen in   the   north  struck.  The  associations  sent  delegates  to   a  conference to   discuss  means  for   obtaining  a  return  to   the   wages  of 1840.  The  Chartists  took  advantage  of   this   to   urge  all   labourers to   cease  work  until  the   Charter  should  become  the   law   of   the land;   the   general   strike,   proposed  in   1834   to   secure  a   working day   of   eight   hours,   became  a   political  agency.  ,The   strike  failed for   lack  of   funds.  They   then  called  for   signatures  to  a  new petition,  and  presented  it   with,   it   is   said,   more  than  3,000,000 names  attached.  The  government  refused  to  receive  it.  The Radical  workingmen  tried  to  come  to  an  agreement  with  the middle-class  Radicals  in   a  conference  at   Birmingham.  The middle-class  Radicals  proposed  to   replace   the   "People's  Charter" with  a   "   Bill   of   Popular  Rights."  O'Connor  prevented  the agreement.

The  Trade  Unions  then  broke  away   from  the   Chartist  movement and,   renouncing  boisterous  agitation  and   intimidation,  tried to   improve  the   condition  of   the   workingmen  by   coming  to   an understanding  with  the  employers  and  demanding  labour  reforms from   Parliament.  A   "   National  Association  of   Trades united  for   the   Protection  of   Labour  "   was   formed  which  recommended conciliation  by   arbitration  and   the   use  of   influence  with members  of   Parliament.  This  was  the  new  peaceable  policy which  was  to   take  the   place   of   the   Chartist  agitation.

The  Chartists  remaining  in   the   movement  followed  O'Connor. Returning  to   an  old   idea  of   Owen's  to   support   labourers  out  of work  by   distributing  land  to   them,   he   created  a  society   for   the purpose  of   buying  up   large   estates,  and   dividing  them  up   into small  farms  to   be   given   out   by   lot   to   his   followers  (1846).  This "   National  Land  Company"  ended  in   1848   in   bankruptcy.

Third.  The  Revolution  of   1848   in   France  aroused  the   Chartists to   their   last   effort.  Once  more  they   held   a   convention  at   Lon-

don  (April,  1848);   once  more  they   prepared  an  enormous  petition. O'Connor  announced  a  mass-meeting  and  a  great  procession to   carry   the   petition   to   Parliament.  The  ministry became  alarmed  and  declared  it   illegal   to   hold   a   meeting   to   escort a   petition  "   accompanied  by   an  excessive  number  of   persons   "   ; they   called  on   Wellington  and   intrusted  to   him   the   peace  of   London. The   old   general   stationed  troops   in   the   city   as   if   for   battle, and  enrolled  the   middle  class  of   London  as  special   constables,  to the   number  of   170,000.  The  meeting  was   held,   but   they   stopped the   procession,  and   O'Connor  alone  carried  the   petition  to   Parliament in   a   hackney  coach.  The  petition  was  examined  by   a special   committee;  instead  of   the   5,716,000  signatures  announced by   O'Connor,  they   found  only   1,975,000,  and  some  of   those spurious  (the   Queen,   Wellington,  Pug   Nose).  This  was  the   end of   the   Chartist  agitation.

The  Irish  Agitation. - While  the  Chartists  were  stirring  up England,  the   Catholics  were  stirring  up   Ireland.  A   powerful orator,  O'Connell,  whose  fame  had  spread  all   over  Europe,  had just   organized  into   a   party   the   great   Catholic  mass  of   the   Irish population.  To   tell   the   truth,   he   was  not  simply   the   leader  of   a party,   he   was  the   life   and   soul   of   it.   The   Irish,   unaccustomed  to public   affairs,   had   no  political   life;   they   obeyed   their   priests,   voted for   the   candidates  of   the   clergy,   and   came  in   a   body   to   the   meetings organized  by   O'Connell,  where  they   went  wild   over  the   enthusiastic discourses  of   their   leader.

O'Connell  declared  that  he   belonged  to   the   Liberal  Catholic party,  which  had   just   been  formed  in   Europe;  he   demanded  for the   Catholic  Church  only   liberty   and  equality  with  the   other churches,  he   did   not  care  to   have  it   an  established  church.  He thus  spoke   at   once  in   the   name  of   liberty   and   equality,  in   the name  of   the   Catholic  religion,  in   the   name  of   the   oppressed  Irish nation ;   and   this   attracted  to   him   the   sympathies  of   revolutionists, Catholics,  and   patriots,  which  made  him   the   most  popular  man  in all   Europe.  Since  the   reform  of   1829   the   Irish  Catholics  had   had the   political   rights   of   voting   and   sitting   in   Parliament,  but   they remained  subject  to   all   the   old   systematically  organized  dependence on   the   Protestants;  justices   of   the   peace,  police   officials, criminal  juries,   justices  of   the   Supreme  Court,  grand   juries charged  with  the   power  of   taxation,  municipal  corporations,  all the   men   invested  with  authority,  were  Protestants.  The  official church  was  the   Anglican  Church ; in   some  parts   of   Ireland  it   had almost  no  members,  but   it   possessed  estates  and   in   addition  re-

ceived  tithes  and   a   church  "   cess   "   for   the   support  of   places   of worship,  from  all   the   inhabitants,  that   is   to   say,   from  Catholic  as well  as   Protestant  peasants.  Finally  the   government  deprived the   Irish  Catholics  of   the   liberty   of   holding   meetings.

O'Connell  seems  to   have  hesitated  between  two  tactics;  now   he demanded  from  the   English  Parliament  reforms  in   detail - liberty of   holding   meetings,  a   more  equal   distribution  of   power   between the  Catholics  and  Protestants,  and  above  all   the   abolition  of tithes.  By   agitating  for   repeal   of   the   Act   of   Union,   he   tried   to   get restored  to   Ireland  the   self-government  which  she   had   enjoyed before  the   Union.  In   1831   he   formed  a   committee  to   obtain  signatures to   a   petition   against   the   Union,   but   the   government prosecuted  him.  As   early   as  1832   he   had   founded  an  association to   demand  autonomy,  but  it   was  thrice  dissolved.  But  in   the Parliament  elected  after  the  Reform  Act  of   1832,   O'Connell ceased  to   fight   the   English   government,  and   supported  the   Liberal ministry,   profiting   by   the   meetings   of   the   House  of   Commons to   air   the   grievances  of   the   Irish   against   the   English   supremacy.

The  Irish  refused  any   longer  to   pay   tithes  to   the   Anglican clergy.  Some  of   the  collectors  were  murdered;  of   104,000 pounds  sterling,  only   12,000  were  paid   in.   The   ministry  made  a partial   reform,  suppressing  12  of   the   22   Anglican  bishops,  and abolishing  the   tax   for   the   support  of   the   Church  buildings.  But it   was   divided  on   the   question  of   the   Irish  Church.  The   better to   oppose  the   Conservatives,  the   Irish  party,   nicknamed  "   O'Connell's  tail,"   joined   the   Liberals  and   secured  to   them  a   majority  in the   House  (1835).

After  King   William's  death  O'Connell  supported  Queen   Victoria, believing   her   in   danger   from   the   Duke  of   Cumberland  and the   Tory   party.  He   even  declared  that  he   would  "   gather  together 500,000   brave   Irishmen  to   defend  the   beloved  young  woman who   sits   on   the   throne."

In   return  for   this   the   Liberal  ministry  secured  the   passage  of the   bill   of   1838:   the   tithes   were  no   longer   to   be   paid   by   the   peasant, but   by   the   landlord,  The  Commons  had  voted  an  even  more sweeping  reform,  but   the   Lords  rejected  it.   Ireland  had   no  system of   poor  relief,   but   in   1838   a   "   poor   law   "   was  passed   which provided  for   the   creation  of   one.

But  the   Liberal  ministry  had   little  by   little  lost   its   popularity in   England,  perhaps  because  of   its   reforms,  perhaps  because  of the   business  crisis,   and  also   because  it   was  upheld   by   "   the

Irish  Papists."  In   the   elections  of   1837   it   still   had   a   majority, but  owed  it   to   the   members  from  Scotland  and  Ireland,  the Conservatives  having  once  more,  carried  England.  Its   Radical supporters  were  offended  at   several  of   its   measures,  particularly one  dealing  with  Jamaica.  In   1839   the   ministry  had   to   confess to  a  continued  deficit.  After  a  vote  in   which  it   had  a majority  of   only   5,   it   felt   itself  so  weak  that   it   resigned.  The leader  of   the   Conservatives,  Peel,   charged  with  the   formation  of a   ministry,  could  not  agree  with  the   Queen   as   to   the   retirement of   certain  ladies-in-waiting  who  were  wives  or  sisters  of Liberal  ministers.  The  Queen  refused  to   dismiss  the   ladies; Peel  abandoned  the  attempt  to   form  a  ministry,  and  the Liberal  ministry  resumed  control.  But  the  deficit  increased to  two  millions  sterling  in   1841.  The  ministry,  to  remedy this,   proposed  to   lower  the  import  duties  on  sugar  and timber,  and   to   adopt   a   fixed   duty   of   a   shilling   a   bushel  on  wheat, instead  of   the   sliding   scale.  Their  measures  were  condemned  by a   majority   of   36.   They   dissolved  the   House,   and   for   the   first   time since  the   Reform  Bill  there  was  returned  a   Conservative  majority. The   Irish   party   in   the   House  was  reduced  one-half.  The government  was  intrusted  to  a   Conservative  ministry,  under Peel.

O'Connell  began  once  more  to  call  for   radical  reform.  He reconstructed  the   league   for   repeal   of   the   Union,  and,   adopting the  Chartist  policy,  he   organized  the  agitation  on  a  grand scale.  He   started  a  newspaper,  and  held  great  mass-meetings to   demand  home  rule  for   Ireland.

Like  the   Chartists,  the   Irish,   in   demanding  political  reform, were  seeking  social  reform.  The  population  increased  rapidly (from   6,800,000  in   1826  to   7,760,000  in   1836   and   8,670,000  in 1841),   the   land   being   divided  up   more  and  more.  Official  inquiry in   1835   reported  the   sufferings  of   the   agricultural  population as   beyond   description.  The  peasants  almost  invariably lived  in   squalor   in   little   windowless  mud  cabins,   often  under  the same  roof  with  their  pigs   and   cows,   having   no  clothing  but   rags, and   no   food   but   potatoes.  In   addition  to   all   this   they   were  still dependent  upon  the   caprice   of   the   landlord,  who   could  turn  them out  at   will   without  compensation.  The  Irish  desired  first  of   all a   guarantee  against  this  arbitrary  power;  they   demanded  fixed tenure - that   is   to   say,   the   right   of   the   peasant  to   his   land. tion

The   year  1843   was  one  of   great   agitation.  O'Connell  said   that the   Queen   had   the   right   to   convoke  a   Parliament  for   Ireland  and

prophesied  that  such  a   Parliament  would  meet  within  the   year. Within  three  months  thirty   mass-meetings  were  held  in   Ireland; that   at   Tara,   where  250,000  men  assembled,  voted  the   re-establishment of   the   Irish   Parliament.  O'Connell  declared  that   he   would conquer  "   by   legal,   peaceful,  constitutional  means  and   through the   electrical  power  of   public   opinion."

He  called  together  a  mass-meeting  at   Clbntarf  near  Dublin. But  the   government  had   just   passed   a   law   which  forbade  unauthorized possession   of   firearms  in   Ireland;   it   forbade  this   meeting and  sent  troops  to   prevent   it.   O'Connell,  wishing  to   do   nothing illegal,   implored  his   constituents  to   disperse.  He   was  nevertheless arrested,   tried,   and   condemned,  by   a   jury   wholly   Protestant, for   plotting   and   inciting   hatred  and   contempt  against   the   government. The   sentence  was  set   aside  by   the   House  of   Lords  by reason  of   irregularity  of   procedure;  and   O'Connell,  set  at   liberty, was  received  in   triumph  by   the   crowd.  But  his   health  was broken  and  he   retired  from  the   contest.  Like  the  peaceable agitation  of   the   Chartists,  that   of   the   Irish   was  powerless  against the   English  aristocratic  government.  By   means  of   prohibition, employment  of   troops,  and  prosecutions,  both  agitations  were  put down.

The  Free-Trade  Agitation. - At   the   same  time  that  the   Chartists were  working   for   universal  suffrage   and   the   Irish  for   home rule,   a   free-trade  party   was  working  to   obtain  another  sweeping reform,  the   destruction  of   the   ancient  protective  system.  The party  was  organized  first  to   procure  the   abolition  of   the   import duties  on  grain,   and   was   known  as   the   Anti-Corn-Law  League. The  two  Protestant  aristocracies  which  together  controlled  England joined   forces  against   the   Irish  agitation  for   repeal   of   the Union;  but   on   the   question  of   the   Corn  Laws  the   interests  of   the two  were  in   competition.  The  landed  aristocracy  wished  to   preserve the   duties   which  kept   wheat  at   a   high   price   and   consequently kept   rents  high ;   the   manufacturing  aristocracy  wished  to lower  the   price   of   bread,   so  as   to   be   able   to   lower  the   wages  of the   workmen.

The  free   trade  party  was  made  up   chiefly   among  the   middleclass   manufacturers  and   merchants;  it   had   its   centre  at   Manchester, where   they   had   built   the   Free   Trade  Hall,   as  a   home  for   the Free  Trade  Club.  The  early   leader  was  Villiers,  a  member  of Parliament;  but   the   movement  was  presently  taken  in   charge   by Richard  Cobden,  a  cotton  merchant,  who  gave   his  life  to  the cause,  arid   John   Bright,   a   Radical  orator.  These  three  began   by

urging  the   repeal   of   the   Corn  Laws  in   Parliament,  but   the   Commons steadily   rejected   the   measure  by   heavy   majorities.  The party  then  adopted  the   policy   of   the   Radicals,  agitation  by   public meetings  and  speeches.  Cobden  and  Bright  travelled  all   over England  holding  meetings;  they   showed  how  the   duties  on  wheat benefited  the   landlords  alone  and  injured  all   other  classes;  the workmen  by   keeping  up   the   price   of   their  food,   the   manufacturers and   merchants  by   preventing  foreign   countries  from  selling their   wheat   to   the   English   and   buying   in   return  the   products of   English  industry.

The  league   converted  the   manufacturers  and   was  also   supported by   the   labourers,  who  were  working  at  once  for   the   Charter and  against  the   Corn  Laws.  The  Liberal  ministry  proposed  a slight   reform,  to   establish  a   fixed  rate  of   a   shilling   a   bushel,   and was  defeated  (1841).  The  Conservative  ministry  (Peel)  which succeeded,  depended  on  a  majority  of   landowners  hostile  to   the reform.  But  Peel  was  not  an  absolute  Conservative;  as   in 1829,   at   the   time   of   the   Catholic  Emancipation,  he   tried  to   face actual  conditions,  and   to   do   what  seemed  best  for   the   country  at large.  He   began   by   restoring  equilibrium  in   the   budget   by   reestablishing the   income  tax  abolished  in   1816,   on  all   incomes exceeding  £150.  Although  established  provisionally,  this  duty has   been  preserved  and  has   become  one  of   the   foundations  of English  finance.  Peel  also  carried  a   lessening  of   the   duties  on wheat  against   the   wish   of   a   fraction  of   his   party.   The   equilibrium of   the   budget   was  not   only   restored,  there  was  a   surplus   instead  of a   deficit.  Peel   took   advantage  of   this   to   carry  another  reform  in the   direction  of   free   trade,   abolishing  what  remained  of   the   export duties   and   lowering   the   import   duties,   in   spite   of   the   misgivings of   his   own  party.

Peel,   in   maintaining  the   grain   duties,  hoped   to   keep   up   a sufficient  home  production  to   guard   England  against  famine  in case  of   war.  The   famine  of   1845   showed  him   that   the   population had   become  too   large   to   be   able   to   live   on  native  products  alone. The  potato  blight   suddenly  deprived  the   Irish  of   their  ordinary food,   and   there  ensued  a   famine  in   Ireland,  thousands  of   people dying   of   starvation.  Peel,   in   order  to   save  the   Irish,   decided  to demand  the   abolition  of   the   wheat  duties;  but   as  some  of   his   fellow ministers  would  only   agree  to   a  suspension  of   them,  he thought  it   best  to   resign.  But  the   Liberals  could  not   form  a ministry,  so   Peel   resumed  power  and   succeeded  in   carrying  the repeal   of   the   Corn   Laws,   against   the   majority  of   his   own  party,

## 60  ENGLAND  BETWEEN   THE    TWO  REFORMS.

by   the   aid   of   the   Liberal  minority.  The   bill   was  passed   by   223 Liberals  and   104   Conservatives  against   229   Conservatives.  Wellington induced   the   Lords   to   accept   it   (1846).

The  Chartist  and  Irish  agitations  had  been  directed  against both  of   the   controlling  classes;  free  trade  in   wheat  was  imposed on   the   landed   aristocracy  by   the   industrial  middle  class.

Industrial  legislation. - While  the  workingmen  were  strugling   to   obtain  radical  reform,  a   number  of   philanthropists  were trying   by   means  of   small  reforms  to   improve  the   condition  of workmen  in   the  large   factories.  These  men  were  not  Radicals, some  of   the   most  active  leaders  were  Conservatives  (Ashley); others  were  writers  and  preachers  (Kingsley,  Denison) who  were  moved  by   the   sufferings  of   the   poor.   They   demanded, in   the   name  of   humanity  and   Christian  charity,  that   laws  should be   passed   to   protect  workmen  against  the   neglect  and  avarice of   their   employers.  They   had   great   trouble  in   convincing  Parliament of   the   need  of   these  laws;   all   liberal  schools  of   political economy  of   the   time  taught  that  the  state  should  leave  employers and   workmen  to   settle  between  themselves  the   conditions of   labour,  and   never  interfere.  All   industrial  legislation seemed  a   violation  of   the   "   freedom  of   contract."

The  reformers  began   with  the   workers  who  were  at   once  the most  wretched  and   the   least  capable   of   defending  themselves,  the children.  As  early   as  1802  an  epidemic  at   Manchester  had .obliged  Parliament  to   interfere  for   the   protection  of   the   "   parish apprentices,"  that  is   to   say,   the   children  of   paupers;  the   parish hired  them  out  to   manufacturers,  who  made  them  work  night   and day   in   the   cotton  mills,   as  soon  as   they   were  seven  years  of   age. The  law   of   1802   forbade  working  them  more  than  12   hours  a   day, and   made  other  provisions  for   their  protection.  But   this   law   was limited  to   the   "   apprentices."  In   1819   an  act  was  passed   extending the   provisions  of   1802   to   all   children  employed  in   the   cotton factories,  with   the   addition  that   no  children  under  the   age   of   nine should  be   so  employed.

In   1831   it   was   decided  to   create  a  commission  of   inquiry   to study   the   question.  The  inquiry  revealed  a  state  of   affairs  so lamentable  that  the  Tory   philanthropist  Ashley  procured  the passage  of   the   Factory  Act   of   1833.   This  act  extended  the   protective provision   to   all   children  employed   in   factories,  irrespective of   the   condition  of   their  parents.  It   fixed  a   maximum  working day   of   8   hours  (48   hours  a   week)   for   children  under  13   years,  a maximum  of   12   hours  (69   hours  a   week)   for   young  persons   from

13   to   1  8   years  of   age ; it   forbade  night   work.  To   oversee  the   execution of   this   law   factory   inspectors  were  appointed.  This  was the   first   break  in   the   absolute  authority  of   employers  in   their   factories, the   beginning  of   industrial  legislation,  the   foundation  of supervising  boards.

The  reform  went  on  slowly,  by   little  measures  successively wrung  from  the  members  of   Parliament.  The  Conservative party   helped   to   pass   them,   through  opposition  to   the   manufacturers of   the   Liberal  party.

A   law   was  passed   forbidding  the   truck  system  or  payment  of wages  in   kind  (the   employer  had   a   shop,   where  he   expected  his workmen  to  get   their  supplies,  deducting  from  their  wages  the price   of   the   articles  bought).

Another  law  forbade  the   employment  of   children  as  chimney sweeps.

The  great  reform  was  the   Labour  in   Mines  Act   of   1842,   passed under  the   influence  of   a   pitiful   report   by   an   investigating  commission. It   was   discovered  that   children  five   years  old   were  made  to work  twelve  hours  a   day   in   mines  ill   supplied  with   air   and   full   of water,  in   company  with  ruffians  who  ill-treated  them ;   that   hardly a   twentieth  of   these  boys   could  read;   that  little  girls   were  harnessed to   small  wagons  of   coal   and   required  to   pull   them  through passages  that   were  not   high   enough  to   stand  up   in.  Parliament passed  a   sweeping  reform,  forbidding  all   underground  work  for women  and  for   children  under  10  years  of   age;  also  providing for   the   appointment  of   inspectors  of   mines.

The  Factory  Act  of   1844   forbade  the   employment  of   children under  9   in   textile  industries,  lowered  the   maximum  hours  of labour  for  children  to   6^   daily,   and  ordered  them  sent  to school  for   a   part   of   each   day.   A   few   years   later   a   law   was  passed fixing   ioj   hours  as   the   maximum  day   for   women  and  young persons  employed  in   factories.

Industrial  legislation  extended  gradually  to  almost  all   industries, until   the   act   of   1878   consolidated  all   the   partial   measures into   a   sort  of   code.  These  laws   protected  only   women  and   children, grown  men   being   considered  capable   of   protecting  themselves. In   reality,   however,  in   those  mills  which  employed  both men  and  women,  the   hours  of   labour  were  limited  by   the   legal maximum  for   women  and  the   men  profited  by   it,

The  Irish  Crisis  (1845-48.) - When  the  English  government had   put   an  end   to   the   Irish   agitation   for   home  rule,   the   great   mass of   the   national  party,   influenced  by   O'Connell  and   the   Catholic

## 62  ENGLAND  BETWEEN   THE    TWO  REFORMS.

priests,   resigned  themselves  to   a   peaceful  attitude.  But   the   more ardent  young  men  detached  themselves  and  formed  the  Young Ireland  party,  which  broke  with  O'Connell.  It   was  a   lay   party, democratic  and  revolutionary,  which  was  unwilling  to  obey   the clergy   and   talked  of   establishing  Irish  independence  by   force  of arms.

Peel  tried  to   make  a   reconciliation  with  the   peaceable  wing   of the   Irish.  In   order  to   win   over  the   priests,   he   increased  from £  9000   to   £26,000   the   annual  grant   to   the   Maynooth  Colleges,  the Irish  theological  seminaries;  this   in   spite   of   a   furious  outcry  on the   part   of   ultra   Protestants  (1845).  To   win   over  the   peasantry, he   appointed  a   commission  of   inquiry   to   study   means  for   improving the   condition  of   the   tenantry.  He   then  proposed  to   extend to   all   Ireland  some  features  of   the   tenant-right  prevailing  in   Ulster; but   the   House  of   Lords  rejected   the   plan   (1845)   and   the   reform scheme  fell   through.  Peel   tried   to   soothe  the   hatred  between the   Protestants  and   Catholics  by   creating  in   the   south,   west,  and north  of   Ireland  three  neutral  colleges   to   be   affiliated  with   Dublin University;  but  the  Irish  clergy   condemned  the   scheme,  and Catholic  youth   have  not  attended  in   great   numbers.  Then  came the   failure  of   the   potato   crop   (1845)   and   the   great   famine  of   1846. The  starving  peasants  swarmed  into  the   cities  to   pick   up   scraps of   victuals;  they   ate   herbs  and   lichens;  the   roads  were  strewn with  corpses.  The  surplus  population  perished  from  hunger  or emigrated  to   America;  at   a   rough   estimate  the   population  of   Ireland dropped   from   8,170,000  in   1845   to   6,500,000  in   1851,   and since  that   time   it   has   been   steadily   decreasing  (5,100,000  in   1881, 4,700,000  in   1891).

To   curb   the   revolutionary  spirits,   Peel   proposed  a   bill   regulating the   possession  of   arms  in   Ireland.  The   Conservative  protectionists seized   the   chance  to   avenge  themselves  for   the abolition  of   the   Corn  Laws;   they   voted  with   the   Liberal  minority. Peel,   defeated,  handed  in   his   resignation.  The  Russell  ministry, supported  by   a   coalition  of   Liberals  and   Peelites,  continued Peel's  policy.

The  ministry  proposed  to   protect  the   Irish  tenant  against  the power  of   the   landlord  and   to   permit   the   sale   of   portions   of   those entailed  estates  which  were  burdened  with  too   heavy   mortgages (more  than  half  the   income  of   Irish  estates  was  absorbed  by mortgages).  They   hoped   by   getting   portions  of   these  sold   to   solvent buyers   to   replace   the   debt-laden  landlords  with   prosperous men  who  could  apply   capital  to   improve  the   wretched  farming

prevalent  in   Ireland.  But   Parliament  rejected  the   portion  of   the plan   especially  designed  for   the   tenantry,  and   passed   only   the   bill relating  to   encumbered  estates  (1849).  In   later  years  the   new landlords  purchasing  under  the   encumbered  estates  act  proved  to be   more  ready   to   evict  the   peasants  than  the   old   landlords  had been.  The  peasants  on  their  side  have  been  but   too  ready   to avenge  eviction  by   murder.

All  at  once  the  revolutions  of   '48   aroused  Young  Ireland; clubs  were  formed,  an  address  was  sent  to   the   provisional  government of   France  to   ask   for   its   aid.  The   English  government had   exceptional  laws  passed,   and   arrested  1 18   leaders  of   the   party. An  armed  band  attempted  an  outbreak;  it   was  surrounded  and captured  by   the   police   in   a   potato   field.  The   leaders  were  transported (1848).   Political  activity   came  to   an  end   in   Ireland.

Period  of   Inaction  and  Democratic  Evolution  (1849-65). The  Conservative  party,   divided  on  the   Corn  Laws,  remained long   in   a   weak  state.  The   bulk  of   the   protectionist  party   pulled itself  together  again   slowly  under  the   leadership  of   Bentinck, who  died  in   1848,   and   later  under  Derby   and   Disraeli;  the   dissidents who   had   followed  Peel   in   his   conversion  to   free   trade  (the Peelites)  joined   the   Liberals.  The   Liberal  party,   in   minority  since 1841,   regained  a  majority  through  a   dissolution  of   the   House (1847),  and  kept   it   until  the   election  of   1874;   it   gradually  absorbed most   of   the   Peelites,   giving   them  place   in   every   Liberal ministry;  one  of   these,   Gladstone,  ended  by   becoming  leader  of the   Liberal  party.

Although  the   Liberals  held  the   majority  all   the   time,   the   ministry changed  several  times,   once  owing   to   rivalry   between  the   two Liberal  leaders,  Russell  and  Palmerston.  The  Conservatives were  twice  enabled  to  take  command  for  a  period  of   several months  (1852,  1858-59).

This  was  a   period   of   political  inaction.  The  Liberals  had   exhausted their   reform  program.*  They   completed  the  establishment of   free   trade  by   repealing  the   Navigation  Act   (1849),   by abolishing  most  of   the   remaining  duties,  and   by   concluding  with France  the   treaty  of   commerce  of   1860.  They   timidly  increased the   appropriation  for   schools  (164,000  pounds  sterling  in   1851, 813,000  in   1861)   and   made  the   appropriation  proportionate  to   the number  of   scholars  (1853).

*The  Ecclesiastical  Titles  bill  was  passed  (1851)   to   soothe  the   Protestants. It   forbade  the  assumption  of   titles  taken  from  English  cities  by Catholic  bishops.  It   never  was  enforced,  and  was  repealed  in   1871.

## 64  ENGLAND  BETWEEN    THE    TWO  REFORMS.

Public  life   was   dominated  at   that   time  by   questions  of   foreign policy.  Napoleon's  coup   d'etat  forced  the   retirement  of   Palmerston,   who   had   approved  it;   the   Crimean  War   restored  Palmerston to   power   (1855);   the   Sepoy   Rebellion  (1857)   led   to   the   suppression of   the   India  Company;  the   Chinese  War,   discountenanced by   the   House  of   Commons,  led   to   a   dissolution  which  gave Palmerston  a  majority  (1857);  the  Orsini  conspiracy  (1858) brought  about  his   fall.  Finally,  after  a   short  Conservative  ministry, Palmerston  was  restored  to   office  in   1859   and   retained  the position  until  his   death  in   1865.

This  was  a  period  of   material  prosperity.  England's  commerce, her   production,  her   wealth,  all   increased  rapidly.  The number  of   paupers  decreased  from  1,429,000  in   1842   (maximum) to   890,000  in   1861;   the   number  of   criminals  from  31,000 in   1842   (maximum)  to   18,000  in   1861  ; drunkenness  diminished, the   government  having  raised  the   duty   on  spirits   from  2   to   16 shillings  and   lowered  the   duty   on   tea   from  26   to   6   pence.

The  condition  of   the   workingmen  improved.  It   was  during this   period   that   the   trades  unions  gradually  built   up   the   central organization  which  was  destined  later  to   bind  the   workingmen into  common  action.  It   was  established  without  a   prearranged plan   for   practical  reasons.  Each  trade  union  was  at   first   only an  association  of   men  working  at   the   same  trade  in   the   same  city, a   simple   society   for   mutual  support,  with   a   fund,   made  up   by   regular contributions,  for   giving   aid   in   case  of   funerals,  sickness, destitution,  or  change   of   residence.  The  society   elected  a   board which  represented  it   in   discussing  collective  interests  with  the employers.  Many  unions  had  a  special  fund  for   help   in   case  of a   strike,   but   it   was  made  up   of   special   contributions.

Between  the   unions  of   different  trades  in   the   same  town,  and between  the   unions  of   the   same  trade  in   different  towns,  there naturally  sprang  up   federations,  to  receive  workmen  moving from  one  place   to   another  and  to   harmonize  common  decisions among  all   the   workmen  of   the  same  region.  Each  of   these federations  had  also  a   board,  made  up  of   elected  delegates. Finally  general  associations  were  formed  of   all   the   unions  of   the same  trade  in   all   parts   of   England,  of   Scotland,  or  of   all   Great Britain.  A   general  congress  of   delegates  was  convoked  when there  were  special  questions  to   be   decided;  but   ordinary  affairs, especially  matters  of   finance,  which  had   become  very  complicated, could  no   longer   be   left   to   the   zeal   of   ordinary   members  who   gave up   their  evenings  to   writing.  There  were  now  salaried  secre-

;aries,   workingmen  elected  by   their  comrades,  who   gave  up   their -rade  to  serve  the  rnion  exclusively.  Thus  was  formed  an official  "   general   staff   "   of   workingmen,  who   made  a   business  of defending  their  class  interests.

The  united  movement  of   English  workingmen,  interrupted  in 1843,   began   again,   but   this   time   under  their   own   leaders  and   with a   definite  object.  The   general  secretaries  of   the   principal  associations- mechanics,  carpenters,  masons - meeting  in   London became  accustomed  to   working  in   concert.  They   then  succeeded in   founding  a   common  organ   for   the   trade  unions,  the   Council  of the   Unions.  Officially  this   organization  had   no  political  motive, its   purpose   being   to   discuss  with  employers  the   terms  of   labour contracts.  Unlike  the   Chartists,  the   leaders  of   the   movement rejected  all   thought  of   a  political  program.  They   had   adopted the   liberal  doctrine  of   the   English   middle  classes,  which  deprecated state   interference  in   labour  contacts.  They   relied  on   the power  given   by   association  as  of   sufficient  strength  to   oppose the   employers.  But   they   were  handicapped  by   the   laws  restraining the   right   of   striking  ; to   get   rid   of   these   laws   they   must  gain influence  over  members  of   Parliament.  They   therefore  perceived the   necessity  of   establishing  a   voting   force,   and,   abandoning  the principle  of   political  neutrality,  they   joined   the   Radicals  in   the demand  for   the   extension  of   the   suffrage   to   workingmen.

The   Electoral  Reform  of   1867. - The  reform  question  came  up after   the   death   of   Palmerston  in   1865.   Two   projects   of   electoral reform,  one  proposed  by   the   Conservative  ministry  (1859),   the other  by   the   Liberal  ministry  (1860),   had   been  rejected  by   the Commons.  The  new  Liberal  ministry  (Russell-Gladstone) brought  forward  a  scheme  (1866)  to   lower  the   franchise  by   reducing the   value  of   lands  and   houses  qualifying  for   the   privilege of   voting;   but   a   fraction  of   the   Liberal  party,  nicknamed  the Adullamites,*  joined   themselves  to   the   Conservatives  to   carry  an amendment  cutting  down  the  proposed  extension  of   the   voting right.  The   ministry  retired  (1866)   and   was  succeeded  by   a   Conservative ministry   under   Lord   Derby.

The  Conservatives  were  in   a   minority.  The   ministry  depended for   its   support  on   the   coalition  of   Conservatives  and   Adullamites, who  opposed  electoral  reform.  Then  the   workingmen  took  the matter  up.   Reviving  the   Radical  policy   of   1831,   they   organized

*   So   nicknamed  by   John   Bright,  the   allusion  being   to   the  Bible  story which  tells  how  all   who  were  discontented  gathered  themselves  in   the Cave  of   Adullam. - i   Samuel,  xxii.  2.

5

mass-meetings.  The  movement  was  directed  by   the   "   National Reform  League,"  whose  council  was  made  up   in   part   of   the   official leaders  of   the   workingmen,  the   secretaries  of   the   trade unions.  The  meeting  at   Trafalgar  Square  in   London  made  a strong  declaration  in   favour  of   reform.  Another  meeting  was called  at   Hyde   Park,   but   the   government  had   the   park   closed; the   mob,   in   spite   of   the   police,   smashed  the   railings   and   invaded the   park.  The  government  withdrew  the  police.  Then,  until the   end   of   1866,   meetings  were  held  in   all   the   great   industrial cities  of   the   northwest  and  Scotland,  demanding  universal suffrage.

The  Conservative  ministry  at   first  declined  to   present  a  specific project   of   reform;   they   asked  the   House  of   Commons  to develop  a   series  of   resolutions  embodying  the   wishes  of   the   members regardless  of   party   lines.  The   Liberals  declined  to   accept this   proposal.  Disraeli,  who  had   long   favoured  a   wide  suffrage, then  prevailed  on   his   colleagues  to   submit  a   definite  scheme  as  a Cabinet  measure.  The  decision  was  not,   however,  unanimous; three  dissatisfied  ministers  retired.  The  project,  strongly amended  in   the   Commons,  became  the   reform  act  of   1867   (1868 for   Scotland  and   Ireland).

As   in   1832   this   was  only   a   partial   reform  consisting  of   two measures;  a   redistribution  of   seats,  and   alowering  of   the   franchise. The  redistribution  took  away  58   seats  from  the   smaller  boroughs; ii   were  deprived  of   11   representation,  35   were  reduced  to   I   member each.  Of   the   seats  thus   gained   19   were  given   to   English urban  constituencies,  9   to   Scotland,  and   30   to   the   counties.  The franchise  or  voting   qualification  was  granted  in   counties  to   occupying tenants-at-will  of   property  worth  £12   a   year   (previously £50).  The  £10  freehold,  leasehold,  and  copyhold  qualification was  reduced  to   £5.   In   boroughs  votes  were  given   to   all   householders (previously  the   house  had   to   be   worth  £10   a   year),   also to   lodgers   in   tenements  whose  lodgings  were  worth  £10   a   year unfurnished.

The  reform  did   not   do   away  with   the   unequal  representation in   the   counties;  it   was  estimated  that  125   members  represented 12,500,000  persons,  while  158   members  represented  7,500,000. The  boroughs  with  a  population  under  50,000  had  230   deputies for   3,280,000  persons,  those  with  a   population  above  50,000   having 130   deputies   for   11,537,000  persons.  The  reform  preserved the   character  of   privilege  in   the   right   of   voting.  It   demanded further  one  year's   residence  before  a  man  had   the   right   to   in-

scribe  himself  as  a   voter.  But   it   doubled  the   voting   body   in   the English  counties  and  boroughs,  and  trebled  it   in   the   Scottish boroughs.  In   the   cities  the   increase  was  especially  great.  In short,   the   reform  enfranchised  nearly   all   the   workingmen  of   the cities,   and   England  entered  upon   the   democratic  era.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.

BIBLIOGRAPHY  AND  SOURCES.- See  bibliography  under  chap.  ii. The  documents  are  of   the  same  nature  as   for  the  preceding  period. The  reviews  are  becoming  more  numerous  and  more  important  ;   in   addition to   those  already  given,  the  Westminster  Review ',   the  Saturday Review,  and  the  Fortnightly  Review.

Under  the  head  of   correspondence,  memoirs,  and  speeches,  in   addition to   the   documents  common  to   the  two  periods  indicated  under  the  preceding chapter   (Peel,   Kussell,   Palmerston,  Greville,  Croker)  the   most  important are   :   Malmesbury,  "   Memoirs  of   an   Ex-Minister,"  2   vols.  1884   ;   Iddesleigh   (Stafford  Northcote),  Life,   by   Lang,   2   vols.,   1890;   Prince  Consort,   Life, by   Martin,  5   vols.,   1880,   has   much  original  material  for   political  history  ; O'Connell,  T,   Davis,   1890,   both  on   the   Irish  agitation;  Oammage,  "Hist,  of Chartism,"  1854,   on   the   Chartist  agitation.

WORKS. - ON  THE  GENERAL  HISTORY. - See  chap.  ii.

In   addition  to   Gardiner,  Martineau,  Walpole,  and  the  "   National  Biography," mentioned  under  chap   ii.,   there  is   a   general  history   of   England from  1830   to   1871,   3   vols.,   by   Moles   worth;   also   a   history   since  Victoria's  accession: by   Justin  McCarthy,  "   Hist  of   Our   Own  Times,"  5   vols.,   extending to   1897.   The   series  entitled,  "   Prime  Ministers  of   Queen   Victoria,"  1890-91, is   a   collection  of   biographies  of   the   ministers,  Peel,   Aberdeen,  Palmerston, Gladstone  Beaconsfield,  and  Salisbury,  by   different  authors.

ON  CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  AND  LOCAL  ADMINISTRATION. - See  bibliography under   chap.   ii.

The  chief  works  are  :   Todd,   Gneist,   and,   in   French,  Franqueville.- Cox,   "   Institutions of   the   English  government,"  1863,   an  excellent  account  for   that date.

ON  THE  LABOUR  AND  CHARTIST  AGITATION.- In  addition  to   S.Webb,  see articles  and  bibliog.  in   the   "   National  Biography,"  on  "Owen"  and  the Chartist  leaders  (Lovett,  O'Connor,  O'Brien,  Jones,  Frost).  There  is   as  yet no  complete  history  of   the   Chartist  movement  ; Graham  Wallace  is   preparing one.

ON  THE  IRISH  AGITATION. - In   addition  to  Pressense',  see  the   "   National

Biography,"  bibliog.  under  the  article  "   O'Connell." ON  THE  FREE-TRADE  AGITATION.- J.   Morley,  "Life  of   Cobden,"2  vols.; Villiers,  Free-Trade  Speeches,  2  vols.,   1883   ;   Bright,   Letters,  edited  by Leech,  2   vols.,   Life,   by   Robertson,  1881  ;   L,   Brentano,  "   Anfang  und  Ende der  Englischen  Kornzolle,"  1892   ; Eichelot,  "   Histoire  de   la   Reforme  Commerciale  en   Angleterre,"  2  vols., 1853-55,  a   book  for   popular  use.

ON  INTERNAL  DEVELOPMENT. - A   collection  entitled  "   The  Reign   of   Queen Victoria,  a   survey  of   fifty   years  of   prosperity,"  6   vols.,   1888  ;   each  author has  treated  one  subject:  Huxley,  the  natural  sciences;  Hatch,  religion; Courtney,  finance  ;   Garnett,  literature  ;   Caird,  agriculture,  and  Matthew, education.

ON  DESTITUTION  IN   ENGLAND. - Earl  Marx,  "   Das  Kapital,"  vol.  ii.,   1885; Engels,  "   Die  Lage   der  Arbeitenden  Classen  in   England,"  1845   ;   both socialists.

## CHAPTER  IV.

## ENGLAND  AS  A  DEMOCRACY.

Conditions  of   Political  Life. - The  electoral  reform  of   1867,   by transforming  the   voting  body,   changed  the   conditions  of   political life   in   England.  Voters  became  much  more  numerous;  elections were  more  generally  contested;  in   the   cities  and   boroughs the  workingmen  gained  the  political  control.  Almost  everywhere since   1867   the   voters  have   formed  a   popular  mass  too numerous  to   be   bought,  or  controlled  by   a   great   lord.

The  parties  have  been  obliged  to  adapt   themselves  to  this democratic  transformation;  they   have  adopted  the   custom  originated in   the   United  States  of   organizing  a   permanent  association to   disseminate  the   party  principles  and  direct  party  operations in   time  of   election.  The   Liberals  set   the   example  by   founding  a league  with  its   centre  at   Birmingham,  and  the   Conservatives have  copied   them.  There  existed  already  an  organization  of   the parties   in   Parliament,  each  having   its   recognised  leader  and   its whippers-in  charged  with  bringing  out  the   full   strength  of   the party   for   important  votes.  Parliament  has   preserved  its   ancient custom  of   having   no  pay   for   members,  and   of   voting   openly   by division.  Those  members  who  have  private  business  to  carry on  are  often  absent  from  London ;   they   must  be   summoned  when their  vote  is   needed.

Each  party   has   founded  a  correspondence  bureau,  to   keep   in touch  with  its   voters,  with  a  permanent  central  committee  and local  committees;  as   in   the   United  States,  election  programs have  become  party  manifestos,  and   an  attempt  is   made  to   sum  up each  party's   policy   in   a   short  and   striking   formula  to   serve  as   the battle-cry  for   its   adherents.

Representatives  have  become  more  dependent  on  the   voters, the   House  of   Commons  having  become  more  representative. Parliamentary  rule  has  become  more  systematic;  the  House  of Commons  is   the   sovereign  power,  no  ministry  daring   to   govern without  the  support  of   its   majority. 69

·   The   parties   have   held   their   ground   in   their  old   strongholds. The  Conservative  party  still   depends  chiefly   on   the   voters  of   the English  counties,  that  is   to   say,  on   the   territory  still   controlled by   the   Church  and   the   landed  gentry.  The  Liberals  have  the voters  of   the   boroughs  and   cities,   chiefly   in   the   manufacturing regions  of   the   north  and   west  of   England,  the   English   Dissenters opposed  to   the   Anglican  clergy,   and   the   greater  part   of   Scotland, a   democratic  country;  its   electoral  forces  have  increased.  But the   House  of   Commons  itself  has  been  transformed.  The  old aristocratic  Whigs,  hostile  to  the   workingmen,  have  gradually disappeared;  a  new  generation  of   middle-class  Radicals  has   appeared, elected   by   the   working  classes,  with  a   democratic  policy. The   English   system  of   election  by   plurality  vote,  without second  ballots,  compels  the   opponents  of   the   Conservatives to   combine  their  votes  on  a  single   candidate.  It   thus  prevents the   formation  of   a   distinct  Radical  party.   The   Liberal  party   has become  a  permanent  coalition  of   old  Liberals  and  Radicals which  little  by   little  has   come  to   adopt   the   Radical  program. The  Liberal  leader  Gladstone,  who  began   his   career  as  a   Peelite Conservative,  has  been  won  over  by   a  continuous  evolution  to the   Radical  standard.  The  Conservatives  have  maintained  their policy  of   steadily  opposing  all   new  reforms,  though  never  attempting to  undo  those  already  established.  But  it   has  also taken  on  a   more  democratic  appearance. icy .

Gladstone's  Reforms  (1868-74). - The  Conservative  ministry  of which  Disraeli  had   become  head  (February,  1868)   by   the   retirement of   Derby,  maintained  itself  without  a  majority  until  the end  of   1868.  They   put   off   the   election  of   a   new   Parliament  until the   new   lists   of   voters  should  be   ready,   in   accordance  with   the   Act of   1867.

The  elections  held   after  the   system   had   been  reformed  returned a   heavy   Liberal  majority  (387   against  271),   given   by   the   boroughs and   by   Scotland.  The  Adullamites,  or  aristocratic  Whigs, had  disappeared;  the   Liberals,  elected  by   a  coalition  of   Liberal and  Radical  voters,  entered  on  a  reform  program  which  had been  explained  to  the   voters.  There  were  two  leading  reform projects.  Gladstone,  a   Liberal-Conservative,  leader  of   the   Liberal-Radical coalition,   had   spoken   above  all   of   reform  for   Ireland. Bright,   leader  of   the   Radicals,  stood  for   free   elementary education,  land  reform  to   give   peasants  bits   of   ground,   abolition of   duties  on   tea   and   sugar   to   give   workingmen  "   a   free   breakfast table,"  and   a   cut   in   the   expenses  of   the   army   and   navy. land.

As   after  1832,   the   electoral  reform  stimulated  Parliamentary activity,  and   the   Liberal  majority  undertook  a  series  of   reforms to   satisfy   its   Irish   and   Radical  allies.

Gladstone  began   with  Ireland.  After  the   famine  and  emigration of   1848,   the   Irish   had   passed   through  a   long   period   of depression  without  political  life.  Then  a  new  national  party was  organized  with  the  aid  of   the  Irish  established  in   the United  States.  It   took  the   form  of   a  secret  society,  with  an initiatory  oath,   night   meetings,  and   a   symbolic  standard,  and   gave to   itself   the   name  of   Fenians  (a   name  taken  from  the   legendary history  of   Ireland).  It   was  a  revolutionary  republican  party, wishing  to   establish  the   Republic  of   Ireland  by   an  armed  revolt against   England;  it   counted  on   the   Irish-Americans  who   had   just served  in   the   two  armies  during   the   Civil   War;   it   hoped   also   to attract  the   Irish   soldiers  who   were  so  numerous  in   the   English army.  The  Irish  people  secretly  encouraged  the  movement (there   were  even,   in   1861,   great   demonstrations  in   honour  of   the national  martyrs).

,The   government  had  seized  the   secret  printing-press  of   the Fenian  newspaper,  arrested  and  condemned  the   leaders  of   the party   (1865).  But   the   party   had   reorganized  itself.  The  Fenians remaining  in   the   United  States  had   tried  to   invade  Canada. Those  who  had   come  from  America,  officers  and  soldiers  of   the American  army,  had  prepared  for   a  general  uprising  in   Ireland (March,  1867);   this   was  a   failure.  The  Fenians  tried  to   agitate in   England  also;   one  of   them,   Kelly,   an   American  general,  plotted to   seize   the   arms   in   the   Chester  arsenal,  but   he   was  caught and   taken  away;  a   band  of   Fenians  attacked  the   carriage  in   which he   was   being   carried  away  and  freed  him;   three  of   these  men were  executed  and   were  celebrated  by   the   Irish  as  martyrs.  Another Fenian  general   was  confined  in   a   prison   in   London;  an attempt  was  made  to   blow  up   the   prison   (1867).

These  two  incidents  attracted  the   attention  of   the   English. Gladstone  declared  that  reforms  had  become  necessary  in   Ireland. Like   Peel   in   1845,   he   proposed  not  to   satisfy   the   revolutionists by   granting  home  rule,   but   to   appease  the   mass  of   the population,  the   clergy,   and   the   peasants.  It   was  necessary,  he said,   to   make  law   as  much  respected  in   Ireland  as   in   England, and,   in   order  to   make  it   respected,  they   must  first   convince  the people  that  law   is   a   friend,   not  an  enemy.  Following  this   principle, the   ministry   carried  two  reforms:

First.    They     disestablished    and    disendowed    the     Anglican

Church  in   Ireland.  They   disendowed  it   by   taking   from  it   its tithes  and  estates,  the   whole  valued  at   sixteen  million  pounds sterling.  The   proceeds  were  divided  into  three  parts:  the   largest went  as  compensation  to   the   rectors  and   others  having   "   vested interests"  in   the   Church,  which  was  to   become  an  unofficial  corporation; the   second  part   went  to  assist  the   two  other  Irish churches,  the   Presbyterian  and   the   Catholic,  and   the   third  to   be a   fund   for   the   establishment  of   charitable  institutions  (hospitals and   asylums).*  This  was  not  a  radical  measure,  for   the  Anglican Church   of   Ireland  retained  its   buildings  and   was  still   very rich ; but   the   reform  put   an  end   to   the   official  inequality  between the   churches,  which  was  offensive  to   the   majority  (1869-71).

Second.  To   better  the   condition  of   the   peasants  the   ministry passed  the   Land  Act   of   1870.   This  gave   the   force  of   law   to   the custom  of   the   Protestant  province  of   Ulster,  where  the   landlord was  under  obligation,  by   force  of   custom,  not  to   raise  the   rent arbitrarily,  nor  to   evict  the   tenant  without  paying   him   a   compensation to   reimburse  him   for   all   improvements  made  in   the land.  A   similar  right   to  compensation  for  eviction  was  extended to   the   three  Catholic  provinces,  in   the   hope   of   protecting the   Irish  peasants  against  eviction.  But  the   measure  had  little effect  ;   as   the   landlords  preserved  the   right   to   "   contract  out  of the   Act  "   at   will,   they   made  use  of   it   to   force  their  tenants  to forego   the   advantages  of   the   new   law.

At   the   same  time,   to   oppose  the   revolutionists,  the   government passed  a   Coercion  Act,   instituting  a   special   system   for   Ireland.

In   England  the   Liberal  ministry,  to   satisfy   the   Radicals,  carried a   reform  in   primary  education.  The  old  Liberals  had contented  themselves  with  an  appropriation  for   private  schools  ; the   Act  of   1870   made  primary  instruction  obligatory.  In   all those  regions  where  the   private  schools  seemed  insufficient,  the government  received  the   right   to   institute  a   school  board,   elected by   the   taxpayers,  which  was  empowered  to   levy   a   tax   for   building and   maintaining  public   schools,  to   compel   parents  to   send their  children  to   school,  and   to   exempt  the   poor   from  the   school fees.  The  public   schools  had   to   be   non-sectarian,  but   the   Bible

*   The   amount  given   to   the   Catholics  and  Presbyterians  G£i,   120,000)  was fourteen  times  the  annual  grants  they   had  been  receiving  under  the   name of   the   Maynooth  Grant  and  the  Regium  Donum.  These  annual  grants were  then  discontinued.  The  third  part,  known  as  the  Irish  Church Surplus,  has  been  drawn  on   for   many  purposes;  a  portion  of   it   was  used, under  the  Act  of  1882,  to  pay  off   the  rents  of   tenants  who  were  in arrears.- TR.

might  be   taught.  The  educational  committee  became  a  sort  of ministry  of   instruction,  charged  with  the   organization  and   direction of   the   schools.  It   was  a  system  of   public   education, compulsory  and  independent  of   the   Church,  but  which  at   the same  time  did  not  interfere  with  private,  voluntary,  and   sectarian schools.

The  ministry  abolished  the  old   custom  of   purchase  in   the English  army.  They   had  carried  the   measure  in   the   House  of Commons,  but  the   Lords  rejected  it;   they   then  accomplished  the reform  by   royal   order,   withdrawing  the   royal   warrant  on  which the   system  of   purchasing  commissions  rested  (1871).

Finally  the   ministry,  carrying  out  the   promise  made  to   the Radicals,  reformed  the   voting   process.  The  Radicals  since  1832 had  been  vainly   calling   for   secret  ballot,  to   make  voters  independent, and   to   sustain  them   against   the   pressure  of   the   aristocracy and   clergy.   The   reform  of   1867   had   preserved  the ancient  system  of   viva  voce  voting.  The  old   parties   had   held to   this   because  it   gave   landlords  an  opportunity  to   observe  the votes  of   their   tenants;  they   defended  it   theoretically  on   the   ground that  voting,  being   a   public   function,  should  be   carried  on   in public.  At   last   (1872)   the   Liberal  party  resigned  itself  to   the establishment  of   the   secret  ballot.  They   followed  the   plan   invented by   the   English   democratic  colony   of   Victoria  in   Australia: the   election  officer  has   a   ticket  printed  containing  the   names of   all   the   candidates;  each  voter  receives  this   ticket  and   marks with  a   cross  the   candidate  for   whom  he   votes. tocracy

Gladstone  next  proposed  to  establish  in   Ireland  a  university independent  of   the   Church  (1873);   but   the   majority  would no   longer   follow  him;   they   rejected  the   scheme.

Trade  Union  Legislation. - The  workingmen  who  had  aided  in bringing  about  the   electoral  reform  now  called  for   a   reform  in the   laws  governing  associations.  Their  professional  syndicates, the   trade  unions,  were  simply   tolerated,  not  recognised;  the   Act of   1825   (see   chapter   ii.)   permitted  coalition  between  workingmen, but   with  certain  restrictions  so   interpreted  that  justices  of   the peace  might  condemn  to   imprisonment  labourers  who  abused a   comrade  unwilling  to   strike.  The  old   law   regarding  Master  and Servant  recognised  the   legal   inequality  between  employer  and employee;  if   an  employer  broke  the   contract  or   discharged  the employee,  he   had  only   to   pay   damages;  if   the   employee  broke the   contract,  he   incurred  the   penalty   of   three  months'  imprisonment, a   single   justice   of   the   peace   having   the   power  to   arrest

and   condemn  him  without  appeal.  In   these  cases  the   employer could  testify;   the   employee,  being   the   accused,  could  not.  During the   single   year   of   1863   it   was  estimated  that   there  had   been more  than  ten  thousand  prosecutions  of   workingmen.

In   the   period   of   industrial  prosperity  which  followed  1860  a great  strike  was  made  for   a  rise  of   wages  and  a   lessening  of the   hours  of   labour.  The  employers  retaliated  with  lock-outs, and,   as   formerly  in   1834   (see   chapter   iii.),   with   the   demand  that no  man  working  for   them  should  belong  to   a   union.

Some  workmen  in  Sheffield  avenged  themselves  by   violence- on   one  occasion  by   the   use  of   dynamite  in   destroying buildings  (1866).  Public  opinion  attributed  these  acts  to   the   influence of   the   trade  unions,  and   it   became  the   custom  in   England for   some  years   to   curse  the   unions  for   throwing  workingmen  into  wretchedness  by   exciting  them  to  strikes  or  working on   their   fears   to   make  them  submit  to   the   despotic  orders  of   the unions.  Secretaries  of   associations  were  represented  as  adventurers who   lived   at   the   expense  of   the   labouring  classes.  The   government appointed   a   commission  of   inquiry   on   the   abuses  committed by   the   unions  within  the   last   ten   years   (1857-67).  A   judicial decree   of   1867   decided  that   trade   unions  should  not   enjoy the   rights   accorded  to   mutual  aid   societies,  on  the   ground  that they   were  a   hindrance  to   industry.  It   was,   however,  proved   by   the secretaries  of   the   federations  that   the   unions  not  only   were  guiltless of   acts  of   violence,  but   that,   so   far   from   promoting  strikes, they   aided  in   preventing  them  and  made  the   workingmen  less aggressive.

The  investigation  directed  against  the   trade  unions  resulted  to their  advantage.  The  report  of   the   commission  recommended  that they   should  be   recognised  and   allowed  all   forms  of   coalition.

The  Liberal  ministry,  following  this  advice,  passed  the   Act  of 1871,   which  recognised  trade  unions  as  capable  of   holding  property and   of   maintaining  and   defending  actions  at   law.  But  to satisfy   the   great   manufacturers  they   passed   at   the   same  time  an amendment  to  the  criminal  law.  This  amendment  forbade strikers,  under  penalty  of   imprisonment,  to   station  "   pickets   "   to warn  outside  labourers  that  their  comrades  were  on  a  strike,  or to   beg   them  not  to   hinder  the   strike,   or  even  to   keep   a   watch  on men  who  returned  to  work.  Strikes  were  made  lawful,  but  all means  of   making  them  succeed  remained  illegal.  Seven  women were  imprisoned  for   crying   "   Bah ! "   at   at   passing   workman  who had  abandoned  the   strike.

## IMPERIALIST  POLICY  OF  CONSERVATIVE  MINISTRY.^    75

The  trade  unions  revived  the   agitation  for   the   repeal   of   this   law. Their  common  central  organ,  created  in   1867,   the   "   Association of   United  Trades  "   was  replaced  by   a   Parliamentary  committee (1871)   charged  with  the   task  of   influencing  members  of   Parliament. This   committee  demanded  the   repeal   of   the   Act   of   1871 ; Gladstone  refused  it.   The  working  classes  then  abandoned  the Liberal  party,  which  was  put   in   a   minority  at   the   general   election of   1874.

The  Imperialist  Policy   of   the   Conservative  Ministry  (1874-80), - The  Liberal  ministry  had   little  by   little   lost   its   majority;  it   had alienated  the   Dissenters  by   accepting  the   church  schools  as  part of   the   new  system  and   by   allowing  religious  instruction  to   be given   in   the   public   schools;  it   had   alienated  the   working  classes by   refusing  to   repeal   the   Act   of   1871.   Gladstone  dissolved  Parliament. In   the   new  House  of   Commons,  elected  in   January, 1874,   the   Conservatives  for  the  first  time  since  1847,   had   a majority  (of   nearly   fifty   votes).

The  Conservative  ministry  governed  six   and  a   half  years  with this   majority.  Its   leader,   Disraeli  (made   Lord  Beaconsfield  in 1876),   had   only   a   negative  program  for   home  affairs:  to   uphold the   institutions  of   old   England - royalty,   the   House  of   Lords,   and the   Anglican  Church - against  the   attacks  of   the   Radicals.  But he   expressed  this   traditional  policy   under  a   new  form.  Being an  orator  and  a   novelist,  he   inclined  toward  theatrical  attitudes and  literary  forms.  He   was  credited  with  aiming  to  give   the Conservatives  a  policy   and  spirit   altogether  different  from  that of   the   old   aristocratic  Tories.  He   belonged  to   a   converted  Jewish family,   and   had   come  forward  first   as  a   Radical  candidate expressing  in   his   early   speeches  and   later  in   the   novel  "   Sybil " his   sympathy  with  the   Chartist  labourers.  Even  when  he   had   become a   Conservative  member,  he   continued  to   ridicule  the   prevailing ideas   of   the   aristocracy;  he   compared  the   English   government from  1688  to   1832   to   the   constitution  of   Venice;  he   accused  the aristocratic  families  of   having  usurped  the  royal   power,  and talked  of   "   emancipating  the   sovereign  "   from  the   tyranny  of Parliament  and  founding  a  government  on  three  forces,  the monarchy,  the  Church,  and  the   people.  Later  he   declared  that the   Conservative  party   had  three  great  objects:  to   preserve  the national  Church,  to   keep   the   English   Empire  intact,  and   to   raise the   condition  of   the   people.  He   appealed  to   the   people   to   support the   sovereign   and   the   Church;  in   return  for   which  the   sovereign should   improve   the   material  condition  of   the   people,   and

the   Church  their  moral  condition.  His  ideal  was  an  ecclesiastical and   democratic  monarchy - a  combination  of   the   conceptions of   Napoleon  III.,   Bismarck,  and  Leo  XIII.  With  the   exception of   the   act   of   1875   on  strikes  and   some  reforms  of   detail (in   schools,  public   health,   and   care  of   the   poor),   the   Conservative ministry  did   little  that   was  noteworthy  in   domestic  policy.  It occupied  itself  mainly  with  external  matters.  Disraeli  tried  to excite  English  national  feeling   by   adopting  a   warlike  policy   in   the name  of   English  honour,  compromised,  as   he   said,   by   Gladstone's neutral   policy.

He  directed  this   patriotic  agitation  toward  two  subjects - the English  colonies  and  the   Eastern  question.  The  Liberal  influence was   tending   toward  the   separation  of   the   colonies  from  the mother  country.  Distant . dependencies  the  Liberals  regarded simply  as  a   useless  expense.  The   Conservatives  declared  for   the "   integrity   of   the   British  Empire,"  and   looked  toward  tightening the   bonds  between  England  and  her   colonies  by   a  military  and commercial  federation.  The  government  proclaimed  the   Queen Empress  of   India.  They   attempted  a   federation  of   Southern Africa,  which  ended  in   the   war  of   the   Transvaal.

In   the   Eastern  question  Disraeli  declared  for   the   support  of   the Ottoman  Empire.  Gladstone  checked  him  for   a   time  by   exciting popular  opinion  against  the   Turks  as  guilty   of   the   "   Bulgarian atrocities  "   (the   title   of   Gladstone's  pamphlet).  He   organized  in 1876   great   indignation  meetings  in   the   large   cities.  But   Parliament decided  to   approve   interference  ; England,  as  at   the   time   of the   Crimean  War,   adopted  a   warlike  policy   and   played   an  active part   in   European  affairs.  Beaconsfield  took  part   in   the   Congress of   Berlin,   and   on   his   return  was  triumphantly  received  in   London (1878).

The  Conservative  ministry  also   ended  the   Ashanti  war   in   1874, and   began   the   war   in   Afghanistan  and   that   against   the   Zulus.

Formation  of   the   Irish  Home  Rule  Party. - Under  the  Conservative ministry   there   sprang  up   in   Ireland  a   new  opposition party  which  by   a   new  policy   acquired  a   decisive  influence  over internal  affairs  in   England.  Until  now  the   English  had   occupied themselves  with  Ireland  only   intermittently.  The  Irish  question had   faced  each   generation  (1801,   1820-29,  1843-48,  1865-67),  and it   was  never  settled.  The  Irish  people   remained  miserable  and unhappy,  but  when  they   stopped  active  demonstrations  the English  forgot  all  about  them.  The  Irish  opposition  existed no   longer   except   in   two  classes  of   men  working  inde-

pendently.  In   Parliament  there  was  a   little  group  of   Irish home-rule  representatives,  standing  outside  the  great  parties, formed  of   insignificant  men  little  considered  by   their  richer  colleagues. In   Ireland  there  was  an  agrarian  party,  made  up   of young  men  who  avenged  themselves  for  eviction  by   shooting landlords  or   their  agents  and   by   mutilating  cattle.  These  modes of   vengeance  had  been  practised  since  the   eighteenth  century and  in   the   nineteenth  century  there  had   always   been  in   Ireland men  ready  to  resort  to  violence.  Whiteboys  and  moonlighters were  so  called  because  they   preferred  to   do   their  work  at   night; they   did   not,   however,  form  a   political  party.   There  were  still a   few   Fenians,  but   they   were  without  organization.

The  Irish  had   demanded  first   the   repeal   of   the   Act   of   Union, then  a   republic.  The   Parliamentary  group  adopted  a   new  name, that   of   the   Home  Rule  party;  they   demanded  not  complete  separation, but   a   home  government  directed  by   an   Irish  Parliament.

This  party  at   first   had   no   influence,  the   House  of   Commons taking  little  account  of   its   Irish  members.  The  situation changed  when  Parnell  took  the  leadership  of   the   Home  Rule party.  He   was  a   Protestant  and   of   English  family,   but   brought up   in   Ireland  and   devoted  to   the   cause  of   Irish  independence. He   induced  the   party   to   adopt   a   new  policy   in   the   English   Parliament and   in   Ireland.

In   Parliament  his   principle  was  to   form  an   Irish  party   entirely separate  from  the   English  parties,  not  allying  itself  to   one  to oppose  the   other  as   in   O'Connell's  time,  but  devoting  itself to   blocking  the   work  of   the   Parliament.  The  aim   was  to   stop the   progress  of   English   affairs  and   force  the   consideration  of   Irish affairs.  The  customs  of   the   English  Parliament,  consecrated  by tradition,  recognised  the   right   of   every  member  to   speak   for   an indefinite  length   of   time.  Now  every  member  could  propose  an amendment  on  every   line   of   every   bill;   could  call   for   a   vote   by division,  which  takes  time,   and  could  make  after  each  vote  a motion  to   adjourn  or  raise  the   question  whether  there  was  a quorum  present  and  demand  a  count  of   the  House.  It   was therefore  easy   for   a   small  number  of   determined  members  to stop   the   progress  of   business  at   will.

This   plan,   known  as  obstruction,  had   been  a   little   employed  by every  party  when  in   minority,  but   only   on  rare  occasions.  Parnell made   a   systematic  practice   of   it.   The   Irish   members,  having arranged  to   relieve  each   other,   began   a   series  of   discourses which  were  not   even  reported  in   the   papers,  and   dragged  out  the

sessions  interminably;  in   the   discussion  of   the   South  Africa  Act (1877)   the   Wednesday  session  lasted  until  two  o'clock  Thursday afternoon.  The  obstruction  of   the   "   Irish  brigade  "   became  so annoying  that  the   House  of   Commons,  in   defiance  of   established custom,  gave   its   Speaker  the   power  to  call  for   a  vote  on  the suspension  of   any  member  guilty  of   wilfully  and  persistently obstructing  the   business  of   the   House.  In   1879   it   was  estimated that   during   a   single   session  of   Parliament  a   certain  Irish member  had  spoken  500   times,  another  369.

In   Ireland  the   Parliamentary  party   came  to   an  understanding with  the   leaders  of   the   land   party.   Davitt,  an  old   Fenian  convict, brought   back   in   1877,   started  a   defensive  association  among the   peasants  which  presently  became  the   "   Land  League   ";   it   was founded  in   Galloway  and  then  extended  to  all   Ireland  (1879). The  act  of   1870   did   not  prevent  the   landlord  from  exacting  an extortionate  rent  nor   from  driving  out  a   tenant  who  did   not  pay his   rent.  By   reason  of   several  short  crops,  coupled  with  a   fall in   prices   of   farm   produce,   many  peasants  could  not  pay   their  rent. The  number  of   evictions  increased  accordingly  (from  1269   in 1876   to   2267   in   1879).   The   Land  League  adopted  a  program summed  up   in   three  catchwords:  1st,   fixity   of   tenure,  the   right   of the   tenant  to   hold   his   land   so   long   as   he   paid   his   rent;   2d,   free sale,   the   right   of   the   tenant  to   sell   his   holding;   3d,   fair   rent,   which was  explained  to   be   the   annual  value  of   the   land  in   its   natural state  ("   prairie   value  ").   These  were  known  as   the   three  F's. Their  intended  effect  was  to   reduce  the   landlord  to   the   position of   a   mere  rent-receiver  and   to   transform  the   Irish  peasants  into small  proprietors  burdened  only   with  a  small  fixed  rent.  To compel  the   landlords  to   yield,   Parnell  advised  those  peasants  who had   received  notice  to   quit   to   stand  by   their   farms  until   they   were driven  out,   trusting  that   many   landlords  would  shrink  from  the costly   process  of   police   eviction.  The  Land  League  was  itself to   aid   peasants  who   resisted,  the   members  of   the   League   pledging themselves  not  to   take   the   place   of   an  evicted  tenant.

But  there  was  no  money  to  carry  on  this  struggle.  Parnell called  for   contributions  from  Irish  patriots  in   America.  He made  a   tour  of   the   United  States,   was  received  there  as   the   representative of   Ireland,  and  returned  with  the   sum  of   seventytwo  thousand  pounds  sterling  (1879-80).

The  Home  Rule  party   had  combined  three  forces,  the  Irish peasants,  the   Irish  members,  and   the   Irish  in   America.  In   Ireland it   worked  upon  the  peasants  by   the   promise  of   improving

:heir   material  condition  ; it   made  them  desire  an   Irish   Parliament to   make  the   land  reform;  it   made  them  elect  Home  Rule  candidates. In   England  it   employed  the  Irish  members  in   forcing the   attention  of   Parliament  to   the   Irish  question  with  the   hope of   securing  home  rule.  In   America  it   gathered  the   necessary funds  for   the   national  agitation.

The  party,   definitely  organized  in   1879,   elected  Parnell  as   its leader.  «

Struggle  between  the  Liberal  Ministry  and  the  Irish  Party (1880-85). - The  Conservative  ministry  had  all   this   time  kept   its majority  in   the   House  of   Commons.  After  the   success  of   the Congress  of   Berlin  Beaconsfield  thought  he   could  count  on  a   majority; he   dissolved  Parliament  in   order  to   secure  a   new  period   of power.  But  the   voters,  probably  indifferent  to   the   foreign   policy and  discontented  by   reason  of   business  depression  and   a   series  of bad  crops,  deserted  the   Conservatives.  The  elections  of   1880 gave   the   Liberals  an  unexpected  majority  (349   Liberals,  235   Conservatives, and   63   Home  Rulers).

The  Liberal  ministry  under  Gladstone,  which  now  assumed charge  of   the   government,  was  occupied  with  the   struggle  against the   Irish   party   and   with   electoral  reform.  Abroad  it   began   the English  occupation  of   Egypt  and  came  to  an  agreement  with Russia  as   to   the   Afghan   boundary.

The  ministry  tried  in   the   session  of   1880  to   appease  the   Irish by   a   bill   designed  to   protect  tenants  against   eviction  for   nonpayment of   rent,   in   cases  where  the   courts  were  satisfied  that   the failure  to   pay   was   due   to   inability.  The   bill   was  not  accepted by   the   Irish  members,  and  was  eventually  rejected  by   the House  of   Lords.  In   the  Home  Rule  party  those  in   favour of   keeping   up   the   struggle  had   just   got   the   better  of   those  who favoured  alliance  with  the   Liberals:  Parnell  had   been  re-elected as   leader  by   a   vote  of   twenty-three  to   eighteen.  ·

The  Home  Rule  party   declared  the  government  scheme  insufficient and   again   demanded  radical  reform - the   suppression of   landlordism  and   the   concession  of   national  home  rule.  The Irish  agitation,  instead  of   quieting  down,   increased  in   violence. Agrarian  crimes,  that   is   to   say,   murders  and   other  acts  of   violence against  landlords,  became  more  numerous.  New  devices  were directed  against  the   enemies  of   the   League.  They   were  put under  "   boycott";  no   Irishman  would  have  anything  to   do   with them;  they   could  find   neither  man  nor  woman  willing  to   work for   them,   nor  any   tradesman  to   sell   them  anything.  This  pro-

cedure,  first  applied  to   Captain  Boycott  (November,  1880),   became known  under  the   name  of   the   earliest  victim.  Active resistance  to   eviction,  boycotting,  and   personal  acts  of   vengeance made  the   situation  intolerable  to   Irish  landlords.  A   deputation of   105   great   proprietors  entreated  the   Viceroy  of   Ireland  to   protect them   and   to   keep   their   names  secret,   for   fear   of   bringing down  upon  them  the   vengeance  of   the   League.

The  government  decided  to   fight   it   out.  They   instituted  proceedings against   the   leaders  of   the   League,   accusing  them  of keeping  farmers  from  paying  their  rent  and   landlords  from  renting their   lands.  Parnell  continued  his   campaign  in   Ireland.

The  government  then  brought  up   a   measure  providing  for   the repression  of   agrarian  and  political  crimes  in   Ireland.  The Irish  party  retaliated  by   organizing  obstruction  against  this coercion  bill.  The  session  of   Jan.   31,   1881,   beginning  Monday  at four  o'clock,  lasted  without  interruption  until  Wednesday  morning. The   Speaker   then   refused  to   hear   any   more  speeches,  and the   bill   passed   the   first   reading   in   spite   of   the   Irish   protestations. The  House  of   Commons  passed  in   1881  a  provisional  regulation for   closing   debate.  In   1882  it   adopted  a   permanent  rule   for   the compulsory  close  of   debate,  with  the   restriction  that   the   Speaker alone  should  have  the   right   of   suggesting  the   proceeding,  and that   if   forty   members  voted  against   closing   debate  the   number  of votes  on   the   other  side   must  be   at   least   two   hundred  ;   otherwise the   debate  should  go   on.*

In   the   session  of   1881   Gladstone  succeeded  in   passing   the   Second Irish   Land   Act.  This  measure  adopted  the   three  F's   in   a modified  form.  It   set  up   a   Land  Court  in   Ireland,  with  power to   fix   the   rent  of   farms  on  request  of   either  tenant  or   landlord.  At the   rent  so   fixed,   subject   however  to   revision  at   intervals  of   fifteen years,   it   gave   tenants  the   right   to   hold   their   farms  in   perpetuity. It   also   gave   them  the   privilege  of   selling   their  tenancies  to   any solvent  person  wishing  to   buy.   Tn   case  of   non-payment  of   rent, the   landlord  may  sell   the   tenant-right,  but   must  pay   over  to   the outgoing  tenant  whatever  sum  is   obtained  for   it,   in   excess  of   the arrears  of   rent.  The  measure  was  opposed  and  denounced  by ParneH's  followers  in   Parliament,  on  the  ground  that  it   was

*   In   1887   the   requirement  was  reduced  to  one  hundred  ;   and  it   was made  possible  for  any  member  to   move  the  closure  without  a  previous intimation  from  the  Speaker.  The  Speaker  is,   however,  to   decline  to   put the   motion  unless  he   thinks  the  subject  in   hand  has  been  "adequately discussed."- TR.

utterly  inadequate  to  settle  Irish  grievances.  After  it   was passed   they   tried  to   prevent  the   peasantry  from  taking   advantage of   its   provisions.

The  government  made  use  of   the  exceptional  laws  to  arrest some  of   the   Irish  leaders  ; but   the   number  of   evictions  increased. The  ministry  proposed  a  new  Land  Act,   more  favourable  to   the tenants.  This  act  established  a   Land  Court  in   Ireland,  with power  to   fix   the   rent  of   farms  for   15   years,  and   promised  a   state fund  for   the   purchase  and  cultivation  of   land.  But  the   Irish party  went  on  with  the  fight.  A   "   national  convention  "   of twelve  hundred  delegates,  convoked  by   the   Land  League  at   Dub^ lin,   passed   the   declaration  that   "   the   cause  of   political   and   social evils  is   the   system  of   foreign  domination,"  and  that  the  only remedy  is   to   give   Ireland  the   right   to   govern   hersel-f  ( September, 1881).  Gladstone  denounced  "the  new  gospel  of   pillage"  and "   Mr.   Parnell's  tyranny,"  and   declared  himself  firm   in   maintaining English  rule  and  rights   of   property.  Then  he   had  Parnell  arrested. Parnell   replied   with   this   watchword,  "   No   more  rents  ; do not  pay  your  rent  until  the   government  gives   up   the   system  of terrorism  and  restores  to   the   people   their  constitutional  rights. Against  the   passive  resistance  of   a  whole  nation  military  force is   disarmed."  The  government  declared  the  League  dissolved (October,  1881).  The  League  transported  its   headquarters  to England  and  a   league   of   women,  led   by   Parnell's  sister,   kept   up the   fight   at   home.

After  several  months  of   agitation,  arrests,  and   prosecutions  the ministry  made  up   their  minds  to  a  reconciliation,  and  made arrangements  with  the   Irish  leaders  imprisoned  at   Kilmainham. This  was  known  as  the   "   Kilmainham  treaty."  The  ministry  released the   prisoners   and   promised  them  a   law   remitting  arrears of   rent  to   the   tenants.

But   a   small  revolutionary  body,   the   Invincibles,  were  holding by   the   Fenian  traditions,  and   wished  an  armed  revolt  and   a   complete separation  from   England.  These  men  upbraided  the   Home Rulers  for   demanding  only   a   Home  Rule  Parliament,  and   rejected their  policy   of   legal   resistance.  In   order  to   make  a   reconciliation impossible,  they   assassinated  in   broad  daylight,  in   a   Dublin  park, the   secretary  and  under-secretary  for  Ireland  (May   6,   1882). The  ministry  replied  with  a   bill   which  instituted  trial  by   magistrates without  juries,   and   placed   Ireland  under  coercion  for   three years.

The  violent  revolutionists,  allied  with  societies  in   America, 6

tried,   like   the   Russian  revolutionists,  the   effect  of   dynamite  explosions to   compel  the   English  to   grant   Irish  home  rule.  They worked  in   England  at   the   very   doors  of   the   government;  there was  an  explosion  in   the  local  government  office  in   1883,   in the   vestibule  of   the   House  of   Commons  in   January,  1885,   and   in 1883   a   band  was   discovered  which  was  making  dynamite  at   Birmingham and   at   Liverpool  with  which  to   blow  up   public   buildings. This   scheme  was  avowed  in   the   United  States  at   a   public meeting  by   an   Irish  revolutionist  named  O'Donovan  Rossa;  the only   way   to   get   any   concession  from  England,  he   said,   was   by terrorizing  her. ings:

In   Ireland  a   national  subscription  was  taken  up   in   honour  of Parnell,  and   at   the   banquet  where  the   money  was   handed  to   him the   toast  to   the   Queen   was  replaced  by   a   toast  to   "   Ireland  as  a nation." Electoral  Reform  (1884-85). - The  Liberals  had  long   been calling   for   electoral  reform.  They   were  trying   especially  to   do away  with  the   inequality  between  boroughs  and  counties.  The conference  of   Liberal  representatives  which  met  in   October, 1883,   determined  to  get   the   measure  passed.  The  Gladstone ministry  presented  it   in   two  parts   and   carried  it   in   the   House  of Commons  without  resistance  ( 1884)   ;   all   parties   were  agreed   that such  a   reform  was  necessary.  Even  the   Lords  only   delayed  it   a little   (1885).

The  reform  of   1884   was  not  a   purely   empirical  measure,  like   the two  which  preceded  it.   It   rested  on  a   rational  principle  conforming to   Radical  ideas  ; this   was  expressed  even  in   its   title,   the   Representation of   the   People   Act.  For  the   first   time  the   reformers were  not  content  with  a   redistribution  of   seats  ;   they   created  new seats,   increasing  the   number  of   representatives  to   670.

They   made  a   systematic  attempt  to   lessen  inequalities  by   making the   provisions  uniform.

First.  The  franchise,  or  right   of   voting,   hitherto  differing  in the   counties  and   boroughs,  was  brought  under  the   same  rules. The  borough  franchise  was  extended  to   the   counties,  thus  nearly trebling  the   number  of   county  voters  by   the   admission  of   the   agricultural labourers.  There  was  now  a   uniform  system  of   suffrage for   the   whole   country.

Second.  The  smaller  boroughs  had  had  hitherto  an  excessive share  of   the   representation.  It   was  estimated  that   on  an  average the   boroughs  had   one  member  for   41,000  inhabitants,  the   counties one  member  for   78,000 ;   the   boroughs  therefore  had,   for   the   same

population,  almost  double  the  representation  of   the   counties. The  act  took  away  separate  representation  from  105   boroughs with  a   population  under  16,000  and   left   only   one  member  each to   37   boroughs  under  50,000.  It   redistributed  the   seats  thus gained  to   the   counties  and   to   cities  of   over  165,000   inhabitants, in   the   rough   proportion  of   I   member  to   50,000.  The   cities  and counties  were  divided  into  districts  so  as  to   have  everywhere single-member  districts,  except   in   the   case  of   34   boroughs  having two  members  each.  The  experiment  of   "   three-cornered  "   constituencies, tried   in   1867   with  a   view   to   giving   minority  representation in   cities   having   three  members,  was  abandoned.  The   principle was   that   of   the   so-called  "   limited  vote   " - each  voter  being allowed  to   vote   for   only   two  of   the   three  members  assigned  to   his city.   It   had   proved   unsatisfactory  to   the   Liberals  of   the   cities.

This  was  not,   however,  a   sweeping  reform.  The  English  electoral system   still   preserved  from  its   old   organization  of   established custom,  several  remnants  which  bring   out  the   lack  of   a complete  plan,   and  mark  its   unlikeness  to   the   electoral  systems of   the   continent,  which  are   based  on  rational  principles.  Following their   traditional  practice,  the   English,   in   creating   new ways  of   getting  the   right   to   vote,   have  taken  care  to   preserve the   old   ways.   There  is,   therefore,  now  a   medley   of   ways   by   which the   right   of   voting   may   be   acquired.  But   they   may   be   reduced to   two  general   classes:

(a)   Residence  within  the   district  either  in   a   separate   house  or   in a   tenement  worth  £10   a  year.      In   this   qualification  there  is   no question  of   ownership - it   is   the   simple   residence  in   the   house  or the   lodging,  as   the   person   in   responsible  charge,   that   confers  the right   of   voting.

(b)   Ownership  of   land  worth  £5   a   year  within  the   district  by freehold  or  copyhold,  or  possession  of   the  like  amount  under lease;   or   the   mere  tenancy-at-will  of   land   worth  £12   a   year   in   the district.     In   these   qualifications  there  is   no  question  of   residence; the   mere  holding  of   land   in   the   district  confers  the   right,   no  matter where   the   holder  resides.     These  qualifications  belong   to   the county  franchise ;   a   man  can  still   vote  at   elections  in   every  county where  he   holds  land  in   any  of   the   ways  named,  except  in   the county  where  he   has   a   vote   by   residence.     Men  who  are  neither householders  nor  £io-lodgers,  nor   holders  of   land  in   one  of   the ways  named,  have  no  votes.     It   was  estimated  in   1885   that   there were  1,800,000  men  shut  out  from  the   right   of   voting,  sons  of families  living   at   home,   men  living   in   cheap   or   temporary  lodgings, workmen  lodging   with   their  employers.

Further  peculiarities  of   the   English  electoral  system  are  that:

- (c)   Registration  as  a   voter  is   not  a   matter  of   course.     There are   formalities  preceding  registration;  a   man  must  have  had   at least  a   year's   residence  in   the   place   where  he   registers,  and   this shuts  out  many  workingmen  who  have  moved  from  one  town  or county  to   another  within  the   election  year.
- (d)   The  election  is   not   held  on  the   same  day   all   over  the country.
- (e)   The   election  is   still   settled  by   a   plurality  vote;  there  is   no second  balloting.     This  system  sometimes  results  in   the   election of   Conservative  candidates  in   districts  where  there  is   not  a   Conservative majority,   or   else   it   prevents  the   Radicals  from   casting their  votes  for   the   candidates  of   their  own  choice  by   compelling them  to   vote   for   the   Liberal  candidate.
- (f)   Parliament  retains  its   term  of   seven  years  as  a   right.      It is   in   actual  practice   the   custom  to   dissolve  Parliament  before  the seven  years  are  up ; but   it   is   the   government  that   decides,  so   that the   duration  of   the   House  of   Commons  depends  upon   the   will   of the   ministry,  who   hold   the   members  under  the   fear   of   a   dissolution.    The   voters  are  suddenly   convoked  after   a   very   short   notice.
- (g)   Members  do   not  receive  pay,  and  the   election  expenses, which  are  still   very   heavy,   are  paid   by   the   candidates.     As   the right   of   voting   is   attached  to   the   property  or   the   domicile,  and women  are  not  expressly  excluded,  an  attempt  was  made  to   secure woman's  suffrage  on   this   basis;   the   courts,  however,  rejected  this interpretation.     The   House  has   since  approved  the   principle,  but the   principle  only.

Disruption  of   the   Liberal  Party   (1885-86). - The  Gladstone ministry,  hampered  by   foreign  complications  (in   Egypt  and Afghanistan),  retired  after  a   defeat  on  a  minor  point   in   the budget  in   June,   1885.   It   was   left   in   a   minority   of   12   votes,  owing to   the   abstention  of   some  50   Liberal  members.  The  Conservative ministry   under  Salisbury  which  succeeded,  not   having   a   majority in   the  Commons,  maintained  itself  only   through  Gladstone's forbearance.  As   in   1868,   they   waited  until  the   new electoral  system  should  be   in   working  order  before  dissolving the   House.  The  ministers  tried  to   win  over  the   Irish  party   by declaring  that  they   would  not  demand  the  renewal  of   the exceptional  laws  for   Ireland.

At   the   elections  of   November,  1885,   the   liberals  presented  a program  of   democratic  reforms.  Gladstone  demanded  a  more equal   distribution  of   taxes,  an  administrative  reform  which  should

give   the   direction  of   local   affairs  to   elective  bodies,   a   reform  in   the House  of   Lords,  a   land  reform  to   give   a   small  piece   of   land  to each  farm  labourer,  so  as   to   transform  him   into  a   peasant  landowner. The   election  cry   was   "   three  acres  and   a   cow."  As   to   Ireland, he   declared  himself  ready   to   grant  all   the   local  rights   compatible with   the   unity   of   the   Empire,   but   he   strongly   opposed   the re-establishment  of   a   Parliament  in   Dublin.  To   this  program Chamberlain,  the   leader  of   the   Radical  division  of   the   Liberal party,  added  the   disestablishment  of   the   Anglican  Church. owner.

Parnell  advised  the   Irish  not  to   vote   for   the   Liberal  candidates. There  were  rumours  of   an  arrangement  between  the   two  parties which  had  been  opposing  Gladstone.  Parnell  was  preparing  to adopt   a   policy   more  effective  than  obstruction  ; it   was  not  simply to  prevent  the   English  Parliament  from  attending  to   English affairs,  but   to   get   the   English   ministry  in   the   power  of   the   Irish party.  If   the   two  great   parties   should  have  each  only   a   minority, the   Irish   party,   holding   the   balance  in   its   hand,   would  become  the dispenser  of   power  and  could  name,  its   own  conditions.  This plan   succeeded.  In   the   Parliament  elected  in   1885   there  were 333   Liberals,  251   Conservatives,  and   86   Irish  Home  Rulers.  On an  amendment  to   the   address  in   answer  to   the   Queen's   speech,   the Home  Rulers  voted  with  the   Liberals  and   defeated  the   ministry. Gladstone  was  called  on   to   form  a   new  ministry.

From  now  on   English  political  discussion  was  entirely  taken up   with   the   question  of   the   best   policy   to   adopt   towards  Ireland. And  on  this  question  the  Liberal  party   broke  up.   Gladstone joined   the   Irish,   and   proposed  home  rule   as  a   measure  of   justice and  reparation,  also  as   the   best   practical  method  of   establishing peace   in   Ireland.  The   great   majority  of   the   Liberal-Radical  party followed  him.  One  section,  however,  broke  away,  maintaining that   the   Union  must  be   preserved  first   of   all,   and   opposing  home rule   as  a   dismemberment  of   the   Empire.  These  Liberal  "   Dissenters "   took  the   name  of   "   Unionists  "  ; they   consisted  of   an  aristocratic group,   preserving   under  Hartington  the   old   Whig   traditions, and   a   small   Radical  group  under  Chamberlain,  the   old Radical  leader,  made  up   chiefly   of   members  from  the   region   of Birmingham,  Chamberlain's  home.

The  division  began   when  Gladstone  communicated  to   his   cabinet his   plans   in   regard   to   Ireland  ;   Chamberlain  withdrew.  The breach  became  definitive  when  the  project  was  put   before  the House  of   Commons.  Gladstone  proposed  to   create  an   Irish  Parliament consisting   of   two   elected  houses,   and   a   responsible  ex-

ecutive  council  similar  to   the   English  Cabinet;  but   reserving  to the   English  government  the   control  of   matters  of   common  concern :   customs  and  excise  duties,  commercial  legislation,  army  and navy,   foreign   policy.  In   the   Parliament  where  these  matters  were to   be   settled  for   Ireland  as  well   as   Great  Britain,  Ireland  was  to have  no  voice. cern

In   England  public   opinion  was   distinctly  hostile  to   the   scheme. In   Ireland,  the   Ulster  Protestants,  who  had   long   been  organized in   secret  societies  (lodges),  forming  a  national  English  party called  the  Orangemen,  made  violent  protests,  and  got   up  a league  against  home  rule.  They   did   not   limit  themselves  to   a protest  against  the   ministerial  project,  but   organized  militia,  announcing their   intentions  to   fight   rather  than   accept   the   rule   of an   Irish  Parliament.  The  Ulster  women,  to   the   number  of   30,ooo,  sent  a   petition   to   the   Queen   imploring  her   to   refuse  her   consent to   the   bill.   After   passionate  discussion  in   the   House  of Commons  and  in   the   newspapers,  the   bill   was   defeated  by   a   vote of   341   to   311,   in   the   midst  of   unparalleled  excitement  among the   members  and   the   public   in   the   galleries  (June   7,   1886).

Gladstone  dissolved  Parliament  and  appealed  to  the  nation. The  election  was  exclusively  on   the   Irish  question;  it   was  a   struggle, not   between  Liberals  and   Conservatives,  but   between  Home Rulers  and  Unionists.  The  Liberal  voters,  surprised  at   Gladstone's rapid   evolution,  had   not   had   time   to   accustom  themselves to  the   idea  of   home  rule;   many  refrained  from  voting.  The Conservatives  had  the   advantage  of   remaining  united  and  presenting themselves  as   partisans   of   national  unity,   with   the   additional support   of   the   Liberal  Unionists.  The   election  of   1886 swamped  Gladstone's  party;  in   England  they   had   only   125   seats out  of   455   (in   London  1 1   out  of   62) ; in   Parliament  there  were only   191   Gladstonians  and  86   Home  Rulers,  against  317   Conservatives and   75   Liberal-Unionists.

Party   lines   were  shattered.  Instead  of   two  great   parties   alternating in   power,  there  were  two  heterogeneous  coalitions - the Home  Rule  coalition,  made  up   of   Gladstonian  Liberals  and   Irish Nationalists;  the   Unionist  coalition,  made  up   of   Conservatives and   -two   Liberal  groups,  Hartington's  Whigs   and  Chamberlain's Radicals.

The  Government  of   the  Unionist  Coalition  (1886-92). - The Unionist  coalition  had   a   majorityof  116   votes;  it   held   power   for 6   years.  The   ministry  (under  Salisbury)  was  made  up   entirely of   Conservatives,  but   governed  with  the   support  of   the   Liberal-

Unionists,  who  caused  it   to   adopt   a   radical  reform,  that   of   administrative decentralization.

The  coalition  had  been  formed  to   keep   Ireland  dependent  on the   central  government;  the   ministry  was  chiefly   occupied  with the   fight   against   the   Irish  Nationalist  party.   In   Parliament  the position  of   the   Irish  had   changed.  Instead  of   standing  alone  in systematic  opposition,  they   joined   the   great   Liberal  party,   which promised  to   demand  for   them  Irish  home  rule.  This  party  was supported  mainly  in   the   north  of   England  and  in   the   annexed countries,  Scotland  and  Wales.  It   began   to   regard   home  rule as  no   longer   an  exceptional  measure  necessitated  by   Ireland's special   condition,  but   as  a   normal  system  applicable  to   all   parts of   the   Kingdom.  Some  of   its   members,  therefore,  began   to   demand autonomy  and   even  separate  Parliaments  for   Scotland, Wales,  and   England  (or   different  parts   of   England).  The   British Empire  would  thus  be   transformed  into  a   federation  into  which the  colonies  would  necessarily  enter.  In   adopting  this  program, the   Home  Rule  party   lost   its   exclusively  Irish  character to   become  a   democratic  federalist  party.  Against  the Unionist  majority  it   could  accomplish  nothing  in   Parliament,  but it   worked  outside  to   regain   the   majority  in   the   next  elections. gram, acter

In   Ireland  the   government  declared  itself  ready   to   maintain order,  that   is   to   say,   to   support  the   landlords  in   their  refusal  to lower  the   rents.  The   Land  Court,   established  to   settle  the   rent  of farms,  had  no  power  of   enforcing  its   decisions;  it   simply   announced the   amount  to   which  it   thought  the   rent  should  justly   be lowered,  the   proprietor  being   free   to   take   the   advice  or  not,   as   he chose.  The  Land  League  met  the   government  policy   with  a   new measure,  "   the   plan   of   campaign  "   ( 1886) .   It   urged   the   peasants, when  their  landlord  refused  to   accept  the   rate  proposed  by   the court,  to   cease  paying   their   rent  and   to   form  among  the   tenants  of each  landlord  a  central  committee  into  whose  hands  should  be paid   the   rent   fixed  by   the   commission.  This  committee  was  to confer  with  the   landlord  and   oblige   him  to   accept  the   payment; thus  the   tenants  of   each  landlord  formed  a  sort  of   syndicate against  him.  The  League  made  this  system  obligatory,  by threatening  vengeance  on  all   who  should  refuse  to   comply  with  it. The  government  declared  the  Plan  of   Campaign  an   illegal   coalition and   prosecuted  its   organizers.

The  struggle  now  became  an  open  one,  the   landlords  dismissing tenants,  the   tenants  refusing  to   leave,   and   the   landlords  calling on   the   police   to   turn  them   out.  In   Ulster  there  were  battles between  Nationalists  and  Orangemen  ;   at   Belfast  shots  were  fired

in   the   streets.  A   number  of   Catholic  bishops  openly   supported the   Land  League.  The  government  tried  to   dispose  of   the   leaders of   the   movement  by   prosecution;  but   the   juries   would  not  or dared  not  condemn  the  accused,  and  the  witnesses  refused  to obey   the   summons.  The  government  presented  a  special  criminal system   for   Ireland,   giving   justices   of   the   peace   the   power  to judge   summarily,  within  the   limit  of   six   months'  imprisonment with  hard  labour,  in   cases  of   intimidation  or   boycotting  ; the   government also   reserved  the   right   to   have   prisoners   tried   outside  of Ireland.  The  Gladstone  party  tried  to   put   a   stop   to   this   project by   obstruction.  The  government  then  carried  a  new  measure for   shortening  debate  in   the   House  of   Commons  ;   the   limit  of   the discussion  was   fixed  in   advance  at   June   17,   when  all   articles  still unconsidered  were  put   to  vote  without  debate.  This  was  not simply  closure,  it   was   "   guillotine,"  as   in   the   United  States.  The Gladstonian  members  protested  and  left   the   hall  (1887).  Chamberlain, leader   of   the   Radical-Unionists,  announced  the   abandonment of   all   attempts  to   reconstitute  the   former  Liberal  party.   The Liberal-Unionists  joined  themselves  definitively  with  the  Conservative party   in   a   National-Unionist  party,  retaining  the ministry  and  methods  of   the   Conservative  party,   but  adopting fragments  of   the   Radical  platform.

To   satisfy   its   Liberal  allies,   the   government  carried  an   Irish Land  Act,   whose  object  was  to   let   the   peasants  become  landowners. This   did   not   check   the   struggle,   so   the   government  declared the   Land   League   dangerous  (August,  1887),   and   had   the Irish  leaders  prosecuted,  condemned,  and  treated  in   prison   like ordinary  offenders.  This  gave  rise  to  violent  attacks  by   the Gladstonians  and   the   Irish  in   the   House  of   Commons  and   at   an   indignation meeting   in   London  against   Arthur  Balfour,  the   Irish Secretary,  who  openly  favoured  the  system  of   compression (1889). owners

The  most  important  act  of   the  Unionist  ministry  was  the reform  of  county  administration  in  1888,  carried  for  the sake  of   satisfying  their  Radical  allies.  The  traditional  system gave  all   local  power  in   the  counties  to  the   justices of   the   peace,   that   is   to   say,   to   the   local   aristocracy,  The   act   of 1888  established  county  councils  elected  for   a   term  of   3   years   by the   rate  payers  and   Parliamentary  voters.  These  bodies  are  made up,   like   municipal  councils,  of   councillors,  aldermen,  and   a   presiding officer,   bearing   the   title   of   chairman,  however,  not  of   mayor. To  these  councils  are  intrusted  a  majority  of   the   non-judicial functions  of   the   justices  of   the   peace,  construction  and  care

of   court  houses,  jails,   infirmaries,  bridges,  houses  of   correction, control  of   cattle  plagues,   licensing  of   shows,   etc.,   with   the   right   to levy   taxes  and   to   negotiate  loans.  This   was  a   new  administrative body   superior  to   the   old   unions  of   parishes.  The   larger   counties are   divided  for   these  purposes - each  division  having   a  council of   its   own.  Each  of   the   larger   cities  and   boroughs  is   treated  as a   county   by   itself.  There  are   60   administrative  counties  and   61 "   counties  of   boroughs,"  each  of   the   latter  being   a   city   with   more than  60,000  inhabitants.  The  greatest  of   all   is   the   County  of London,  made  up   from  the   boroughs  surrounding  the   city,   with nearly   five   millions  of   inhabitants.  The   London  County  Council has   almost  the   proportions  of   a   Parliament.  The   same  system  of councils  was  extended  to   Scotland  in   1889.   It   has   now,   by   the act   of   1898,   been   extended  to   Ireland  also,   with   slight   modifications.

To   satisfy   the   Radicals,  these  county  councils  are  required,  on petition  of   workingmen  demanding  it,   to   buy   land  and   sell   it again   in   small  lots.  The  object   is   to   create  a   class   of   peasant landholders.

In   Ireland  there  came  a   division  in   the   Nationalist  party. First,   the   Pope,   by   an  encyclical,  condemned  the   Plan   of   Campaign (1888),  compelling  the   Irish  priests   to   retire  from  the   land   agitation. Then   Mr.   Parnell  was  compromised  *   by   revelations  in conjunction  with  a   divorce  trial   ( 1890).  The  English  Dissenters, supporters  of   the   Gladstonian  party,  threatened  to   break  off   all connection  with  the   Irish  party   if   they   retained  such  a  man  as their  leader.  The  group  of   Irish  members  in   Parliament  fell   into bitter  feud  among  themselves.  The  great  majority,  in   order  to preserve  their  alliance  with  the   English  Liberals,  elected  a  new leader  ;   a   minority   only   stood  by   their   former  leader.  This   meant the   formation  of   two   Irish  parties  - the   anti-Parnellite  party,  to whose  ranks  the   Catholic  priests,   hostile  to   Parnell,  led   the   mass of   voters;  the   Parnellite  party,   independent  of   the   Church  and revolutionary  in   spirit,   made  up   of   the   more  ardent  Nationalists. These  two   factions  began   a   passionate  war  against   -each  other.

Parnell's  death  in   1891   did   not  altogether  restore  harmony,  and the   Irish   party  remained  weakened.  The  ministry  finally   proposed to   Parliament  a  special  bill   to   establish  local  administra-

* The   letters  published  by   the   Times  in   1888,   to   prove  that  Parnell  had known  and  approved  the  Irish  outrages  of   1882,  were  proved  to   be   forgeries in   the   famous  investigation  of   1889.  Pigot,  the  man  who  had  forged them,  committed  suicide.

tion   in   Ireland  (1892),   but   did   not  get   it   passed   before  the   dissolution.

Formation  of   the  Socialist  Parties  (1884-92).- During  the struggle  between  the   Unionists  and  the   Nationalists,  a  new  political party   had   sprung  up,   the   Socialist  party.

For  a   long   time   there  had   been  in   England  but   few   Socialists except  isolated  doctrinaires,  without  political  interest.  Two private  societies  attacked  the   English  system  of   land-holding, which  concentrated  the   control  of   the   land  in   the   hands  of   a   few landlords,  and  reduced  the   peasants  to  the  condition  of   day labourers.

The  "   League  for   the   Nationalization  of   the   Land,"  founded in   Scotland  by   Wallace  the   naturalist  (1880),   demanded  that  the estates  should  be   taken  from  the   landlords  with  proper  compensation, and   become  the   collective  property  of   the   nation.  The "   League   for   the   Restitution  of   the   Land,"  founded  by   the   disciples of   Henry  George,  declared  that  the   land  belonged  to   the nation,  which  had  a   right   to   seize  it   without  compensation.  As a   practical   procedure  they   proposed  a   "   single   tax  of   20  shillings in   the   pound,"   that   is   to   say,   a   tax   equal   to   the   income  from   the land.  But  the   two  leagues  were  recruited  almost  wholly  from the  middle  classes.  The  "   Social  Democratic  Federation/' founded  in   1880  by   Hyndmann,  a   disciple  of   Marx,  tried  to spread  among  workingmen  the  doctrine  of   the   German  Socialists, but   had   difficulty   in   getting   together   even  a   few   thousand adherents.

The  Parliamentary  Committee  of   the   Trade  Unions,  which  officially represented  the   various  labour  organizations,  remained faithful  to  the   Radical  program,  and  rejected  the   socialistic propositions  issued  by   the   congress  of   delegates - that  for   nationalization of   the   land   in   1882,   and   that   for   a   law   limiting   the working  day   to  eight   hours  in   1883.   The  belief  was  created in   England  and   in   Europe  that   English  workingmen,  thanks  to the   strong  organization  of   their  trade  unions  and   their  practical spirit,   were  destined  to   remain  always  opposed  to   the   spread   of socialism.

The  idea  of   social  reform  was  gradually  gaining  ground   among workingmen.     The  great   business  depression  since  1885   brought  ! about  a   crisis  through  scarcity   of   work  and   low   wages.     The   Social Democratic  Federation  took  advantage  of   these  conditions  to organize  in   London  great   demonstrations  by   the  unemployed  ;   j mass  meetings  were  held  at   Hyde   Park  (1886,   1887),   where  there

was  resistance  to   the   police.      The   socialist  agitation  took   two  new forms.

A   small  group  of   educated  and  enthusiastic  young  men  had broken  away   from  the   Federation  in   1883   and   founded  the   Fabian Society.  This  was  a  society  for   study   and   propaganda,  seeking less   to   attract  supporters  than   to   discover  and   diffuse  formulae  for practical  solutions.  Its   policy,   as   is   indicated  by   its   name,   borrowed from   the   classic   memory  of   "   Fabius  the   temporizer,"  consisted in   temporizing.  Its   aim  was  gradually  to   establish  socialism, by   a   series  of   measures  of   detail,   softening  the   transition  between present   conditions  and   the   ideal   state.  English   society   was not  y'et   ready   to   accept   socialism;  an   immediate  conversion  was therefore  out  of   the   question,  and   each   measure  must  be   taken  up separately.  Instead  of   constituting  a   distinct  socialist  party,  all political  parties  must  be   permeated  with  socialistic  ideas.  The Fabian  Society  began   to   distribute  its   publications  about  1888.  It published  first   a   general  exposition  of   doctrine  in   the   form  of tracts,  advice,  statistics,  practical  solutions,  and   lists   of   questions to   address  to   parliamentary  or   local  candidates;  its   ideal  was municipal  socialism.  It   gained  a  noticeable  influence  over  the Radical  party,  especially  in   municipal  politics  ;   it   even  accomplished the   election   of   some  of   its   members  to   the   new  county council  of   London.

The  two   leagues  for   the   nationalization  of   the   land,   the   Social Democratic  Federation  and  the  Fabian  Society,  have  created  a complete  literature  of   social  reform  whose  practical  character  distinguishes it   from  similar  publications  on  the   continent.  Their influence  is   hard  to   estimate;  but   they   have  created  a   strong propagandist  movement,  attracted  attention  to   industrial  conditions, and   provoked  inquiry  into  the  conditions  of   life in   London,  thus  revealing  astonishing  facts.  The  official inquiry   into   the   sweating  system   disclosed  exploitation  on  a   large scale   among  sewing  women  ;   the   investigation  of   furnished  lodgings showed  the   crowding  and   unsanitary  conditions  of   London lodging  houses  ;   the   private   inquiry   conducted  by   Charles  Booth into   the   conditions  of   the   poor,  showed  that   the   usual  cause  of poverty  was  not  as  was  commonly  believed,  vice  and  drunkenness, but   sickness  or   old   age.

A   significant  change  has   come  about  in   the   trade  unions.  The majority  of   them  were  formerly  syndicates  of   the  technical trades,  those  which  required  skilled  labour.  The  workmen in   these  trades,  better  paid   and  better  educated  than  the

general  mass,  were  more  disposed  to  pay  the  necessary contribution  for  keeping  up  a  relief  fund.  The  unskilled labourers  and  farm  hands  remained  outside  of   the  unions. A   new  movement,  directed  by   the   Socialist  workmgmen  Tom Mann  and  John   Burns,  was  set  on   foot  after  the   general  strike of  the   labourers  in   the   London  docks  in   1889.  The  public had   supported  the   strikers  and   made  the   strike  a  success. Unskilled  workmen  began  to  organize:  dock  and  wharf  labourers, navvies,  gas-men,  sailors,  and   even  farm  hands  (1889-90). Unlike  the   old   unions,  the   new  unions  asked  only   a  small  contribution and   gave   up   the   plan   of   working   as  mutual  aid   societies. Their   object   was  simply   to   establish  a   fighting   organization, to   influence  public   opinion,  and   become  a   political  force. ties.

A   Socialist  Labour  party  sprang  up   first  in   Scotland  (1888),

In   the   old   unions  the   number  of   members  increased  rapidly (in   the   10   great   trade   unions  of   builders,  from  57,000   in   1888   to 94,000  in   1891)   and   the   majority  of   them  adopted  a  new  program. Their   ordinary   principle,  since  the   failure  of   the   great agitations  from  1834   to   1848,   had   been  to   accept  the   system  of freedom  in   labour  contracts,  and  to   associate  in   order  to   oblige employers  to   maintain  a   living   wage  and  satisfactory  hours  of labour,  without  having  recourse  to  state  interference.  This principle,  maintained  by   the   better  paid   workmen  (builders,  mechanics, metal-workers)  and   by   the   miners  in   the   extreme  north, became  the   doctrine  of   the   official  leaders  of   the   labour  organizations- the   general   secretaries  and   members  of   the   Parliamentary committee  who  formed  the  "   general  staff "   of   the   working classes.  But   the   lower  ranks  of   workmen,  especially  the   cottonspinners  and  miners,  declared  association  to   be   insufficient  for opposing  the   employers,  and  demanded  laws  fixing   a  minimum wage  and  the   maximum  working  day.   They   secured  in   1878 the   ten-hour  law   for   women  and  children.  This  new  doctrine extended  little  by   little   to   all   trades.  The   change   began   with   a severe  struggle  between  the   advocates  of   the   old   and  the   new policy.  It   ended  in   a   disagreement  between  the   central  committee, which   had   remained  faithful  to   the   doctrine  of   non-interference from   the   state,   and   the   mass  of   delegates   to   the   congress, which  was  beginning  to  pass  socialistic  resolutions.  The  congress finally   enforced  its   policy;   the   delegates  from  the   various trade  unions  officially  announced  themselves  in   sympathy  with Socialist  measures;  in   1888  with  the   nationalization  of   the   land; in   1890   with   the   statutory  eight-hour  day.

then  in   England.  At   the   elections  of   1892   two   Socialists  were elected,  the   first   to   sit   in   the   English   Parliament.

Measures  Urged  by   the   Liberal  Ministry  (1892-95).- The   Liberals had   been   gradually  winning  back  their  old   supporters;  they regained  their  lost   seats  at   almost  all   the   by-elections.  The   Conservative ministry,   feeling   itself   in   a   minority,   dissolved  the   House of   Commons  before  carrying  the   project  of   local  administration for   Ireland.  The   Liberals  came  forward  with  a   Radical  program, proposing,  besides  home  rule  for   Ireland,  the   electoral  reform known  as   "   one  man,  one  vote,"   payment  of   members,  reform  of the   House  of   Lords,  disestablishment  of   the   Episcopal  Church, and  the   establishment  of   parish   councils.  The   Liberal-Unionists voted  with  the   Conservatives,  who  had   just   taken  as   their  leader in   the   House  Chamberlain,  formerly  leader  of   the   Radicals;  the fusion  in   the   Unionist  party   was  complete.

The  elections  of   July,   1892,   gave   the   Liberals  a   smaller  majority than  had  been  expected:  355   for   Gladstone  (275   Liberals,  80 Home  Rulers)  against  315   (270   Conservatives  and  45   LiberalUnionists).  The  Gladstonians  had  made  their  chief  gain   from the   Liberal-Unionists,  who  lost   32   seats.  But   their  majority  was all   from  Ireland  and   Scotland  ; in   England  the   Unionist  coalition still   held   a   majority   of   71   seats.

This  English  majority  for   the   Unionists  made  the   new  Liberal ministry  (under   Gladstone)  powerless  to   carry  any   important  contested measure.  It   gave   the   House  of   Lords,   with   its   great   majority hostile   to   liberal   reforms,   the   strength   to   resist   the   ministry. In   refusing  bills   passed   by   the   Commons,  the   Lords  presented themselves  as  champions  of   English  public  opinion  against  the enemies  of   national  unity.

Gladstone  presented  a  new  home  rule  bill,   giving  Ireland  a local  Parliament,  with  an  executive  ministry  responsible  to   it. This  bill,   different  from  that   of   1886,   proposed  to   retain  Irish members,  to  the   number  of   80,   in   the   London  Parliament,  but without  a  right   to   vote  on  purely   English  or   Scotch  questions. The  bill   was  passed   by   the   Commons  in   82   days,   after  violent scenes,  by   a   majority  of   40   votes.  It   was  rejected  by   a   vote  of 419   against   41   in   the   House  of   Lords.  Gladstone,  wearied  of   the contest,  retired,  leaving   his   place   to   a   young  peer,   Lord   Rosebery. The   Liberals  had   now  no   longer   a   popular   leader.  They   had   lost many  of   their  supporters  by   subordinating  their  policy   to  the Irish   question,  in   which  few   Englishmen  were  deeply   interested. To   satisfy   the   mass  of   the   people,   they   now  adopted   a   purely   Radi-

cal   program.  The  ministry  brought  forward  successively  several democratic  projects:  employers'  liability;  pay   for   members without  private  fortunes;  an  electoral  reform  to   bring   elections on  the   same  day   all   over  the   United  Kingdom;  abolition  of   the right   of   plural   voting  (the   reform  known  as   "   one  man,  one vote   "),   and   a   reduction  to   three  months  of   the   period   of   residence required  for   voting ;   the   disestablishment  of   the   Anglican  Church in   Wales  ; the   reinstatement  of   tenants  evicted  in   Ireland  ;   tenant right   to   compensation  for   improvements  in   land  ;   eight-hour  day for   miners  ( 1894)   ;   an  act   for   the   better  protection  of   children  in factories   (1895).

The  House  of   Lords  either  rejected  all   these  plans,   or  else amended  them  so  that  the   ministry  preferred  to   withdraw  them. A   single   legislative  reform  was  carried  (through  a  concession made  by   Gladstone)  :   the   creation  of   elective  parish   councils,  analogous to   the   communal  councils  on  the   Continent.  The  act  of 1894   established  in   every  parish   having   more  than  300   inhabitants a  council  elected  by   the   rate  payers  and  Parliamentary  voters. Neighbouring  parishes  are  allowed  to   combine  and  have  a   single council  for   the   group.  The  parishes  had   had   from  old   times  the right   of   managing  their  own  local  affairs  ; but   the   right   was  of   a semi-ecclesiastical  character  exercised  in   the   vestry  meeting,  and only   rate  payers  could  take  part.   The  new  system  admits  the ordinary  voters  to   a   voice,   and   the   councils  are  purely   lay   bodies. In   the   case  of   the   smaller  parishes   the   act   is   only   permissive,  and they   have  not  generally,  as  yet,   chosen  to   have  councils.  Some of   the   most  important  powers  conferred  on  the   parishes  by   the new  law   can   be   exercised  only   with   consent  of   the   county  council and  the   Local  Government  Board  in   London.

This  last-mentioned  fact   suggests  a   profound  change   which  has taken  place   in   the   relations  between  the   local  authorities  and   the central  government.  Formerly  the  local  authorities  exercised their  functions  according  to   their  own   judgment.  They   have  now been  brought  under  a  somewhat  minute  supervision.  The  money at   their   disposal   is   largely   contributed  by   the   national  exchequer. Self-government  in   the   English  sense,  that  is   to   say,  administration by   the   local   aristocracy,  gave  place   to   self-government  in   its proper  sense,  administration  by   elected  representatives  of   the people,   acting   under  central  control.

The  budget,  according  to   English  constitutional  theory,  is   under the   exclusive  control  of   the   House  of   Commons,  at   least  as regards  its   details.  Financial  bills,   like   other  bills,   have  to   pass

the   House  of   Lords,  but   the   House  of   Lords  cannot  amend  them. The  Liberal  ministry,  using   its   majority  in   the   House  of   Commons, carried   a   progressive  inheritance  tax   (death   duties).  This was  the   first   time   that   an   English   budget   had   given   countenance to   such   a   Radical-Socialist  proposal  as  a   progressive  tax.

In   checking  the   ministerial  project   of   home  rule   and   democratic reforms,  the   House  of   Lords  had   resumed  in   English  politics   the position  of   a   sovereign  body,   which,  since  the   electoral  reform  of 1832,   it   seemed  to   have   resigned.  For   half   a   century   it   had   given up   struggling  against  the   representative  House;  although  more than   300   new  peers   had   been  created  under  Victoria,  their   hall   was ordinarily  almost  empty.  What  now  restored  them  to   power  was not   that   they   were   lords,   but   that   they   appeared  as  champions  of   a party  popular  with  the   English.  The  contest  between  the   Liberal majority   and   the   Unionist  minority  assumed  the   form  of   a contest  between  the   two  Houses.

In  1894   the  Liberals,  finding  their  policy  blocked  by   the upper   house,  began   an  agitation  against  the   Lords.  As   a  condition of   democratic  reforms  they   demanded  a  constitutional  reform, "   mending  or  ending "   the  Lords.  The  ultra-Radicals called  for   abolition  of   the   House  of   Lords,   and   government  by   a single   house  (the   system  adopted  in   several  English  colonies). The  majority  of   the   party   would  be   content  with  replacing  the Lords  by   an  elective  assembly,  or  simply   preserving  it,   but   at   the same  time  depriving  it   of   its   power  to   check  absolutely  every   bill passed  by   the   House  of   Commons.  Rosebery  declared  (1894) that   to   carry   the   home  rule   bill   they   must  first   convert  England. He   then   announced  the   plan   of   laying   before  the   Commons  a   resolution looking   to   a   revision  of   the   constitution.  A   lively   agitation against  the   Lords  was   begun   in   the   political   meetings,  but   it   led to   no   legislative  proposition. form,

During  this  struggle  socialistic  ideas  seemed  to   be   gaining ground  among  workingmen.  An  independent  labour  party  was organized  (January,  1893)   to   present  candidates  in   opposition  to those   of   the   other   parties,   with   a   complete  doctrinal  program.  It formulated  its   purposes  thus  :   an   industrial  republic  based  on   the socialization  of   the   land  and   of   capital.  The   trade  union  congress, meeting   at   Belfast  in   September,  1893,   voted  to   raise  a   fund for   paying   "   labour  candidates  "   and  to   give   them  as   their  program state   ownership  of   the   means  of   production  and   distribution. The   congress  of   Norwich  (1894)  passed,  by   a  compromise,  a theoretical  resolution  in   favour  of   the   nationalization  of   the   soil and   of   the   instruments  of   production.

The   Unionists  Return  to   Power  (1895). - The  Liberal  ministry, deprived  of   power   by   resistance  of   the   House  of   Lords,  and   but feebly   sustained  by   public   opinion  in   England,  had   difficulty  in holding  its   small  majority  in   Parliament.  The  Liberal  party   was a   heterogeneous  coalition  of   old   Liberals,  Radicals  who  were  half Socialists,  Irish  Catholics  and   Protestants  Dissenters,  both  English and   Welsh.  To   satisfy   these  different  divisions,  the   ministry had   adopted  a   composite  program:  for   the   Irish,   home  rule   and compensation  for   evicted  tenants;  for   the   Radical  workingm  en,   the eight-hour  day   and  pay   for   members  of   Parliament;  for   country voters,  land   reform  ; for   Welsh  Dissenters,  the   disestablishment  of the   Anglican  Church  in   Wales;*  for   the   English  Dissenters,  who desired  compulsory  temperance,  the  Local  Option  bill,   which would  give   to   each  municipality  the   right   to   forbid  the   sale   of intoxicating  liquors.  Each  division  insisted  that  its   special  reform should   be   attended  to   first.

The  ministry,  finding   itself  in   a   minority  on  a   military   question, owing  to   the   desertion  of   the   Parnellites  and   some  other  members, retired   in   June,   1895.   The   first   act   of   the   succeeding  Conservative ministry   (the   third   Salisbury)   was  to   dissolve  Parliament.

At   the   elections  of   1895   the   Unionist  coalition  worked  together, while  the   Liberal  coalition  broke  up.   The  independent  Socialist party  presented  its   own  candidates,  but   could  not  elect  one,  polling only   30,000  votes  in   all.f

The  Dissenters  led   a   campaign  against   alcoholic  liquors   which alienated  liquor   dealers  from  their  party.  The   Unionist  coalition secured  411  seats  (340   Conservatives,  71   Liberal-Unionists)  ;   the Liberal  coalition  had   only   259   seats  (177   Liberals  or   Radicals,  82 Irish).  The  Liberal-Unionists  regained  most  of   the   seats  they had   lost   in   1892.

England  gave  the  Tories  and  Liberal-Unionists  349  seats against  116;   and   in   the   other  divisions  of   Great  Britain  the   Liberals had   a   majority   of   only   40  - 6   from  Scotland,  34   from  Wales.

The  Conservatives  had   a   majority  of   their  own,  without  counting in   their   Liberal-Unionist  allies.  But   the   alliance  had   become

*   Wales,  where  the   old   Celtic  language  is   more  fully   preserved  than  in Ireland, had  revived  in   the   nineteenth  century  a   spirit   of   Welsh  nationality, based  on   language.  The  great  majority  of   the   people  are   Protestant  Dissenters.

\ At   the   trade  union  congress  of   1895,   at   Cardiff,  the  Socialists  were  in   ! a   minority.

close  that   the   ministry  remained  composed  of   men  of   both  divisions. The   former  Radical  leader,   Chamberlain,  now   leader  of the   Liberal-Unionists  in   the   Commons,  had  become  the   government's man  of   action.  From  his   earliest  days   he   has   retained  the leaning  toward  improvements  in   the   material  condition  of   the   labouring and   peasant   classes.  The   Conservative  ministry,  following out   party   traditions,  is   absorbed  in   foreign   policy   and   seems indisposed  toward  undertaking  great  reforms  at   home.  In   1896   it strove  to   carry  a   bill   designed   to   give   the   Anglican  clergy   control of   the   schools.  The  Liberal-Unionist  allies,   however,  refused  to accept   it,   and   the   project   was  withdrawn.

Political  Evolution  of   England  in   the   Nineteenth  Century. England  is   the   only   state   in   Europe   which  has   gone   through   the nineteenth  century  without  a   revolution.  She   has   preserved  intact her   traditional  constitution  and   even  the   mechanism  of   her government.  Outsiders,  forgetting  the   revolutions  of   the   seventeenth century,   conclude  from   this   that   political   stability   is   inherent in   the   English  character.

Yet,   beneath  this   firmly   established  mechanism,  the   working of   political  life   has   undergone  such  a  profound  change,  from the   beginning  to   the   end   of   the   century,  that   England  has   finally emerged  from  her   old   regime.  In   1814   the   nation  was  still   under an  aristocracy  which  had  the   legal   control  of   society,  local  administration, and  central  government.  The  nineteenth  century has   renovated  the   constitution  of   society   by   establishing  the   principle of   equality  before  the   law.  Laws  and  customs  have  been abolished  which  formerly  sanctioned  legal   inequality,  disabilities of   Dissenters,  Catholics,  and   Jews,   impressment  of   sailors,  brutal usage  of   paupers,  prohibition  of   associations  among  workingmen.  Local  administration  has  been  taken  away   from  the   local aristocracy  and   given   to   councils  elected  by   the   people.  The   central government  has   preserved  its   forms,   but   the   transformation of   the   electing   bodies  has   given   it   a   new   direction  ; the   House  of Commons,  formerly  an  aristocratic  legislative  body,   has   become  an assembly  of   representatives  of   the   nation.  It   has   little  by   little shut   out   from   the   government  the   King   and   the   Lords,   until   it   has become  almost  a  sovereign  assembly.  It   has   made  the   ministry, which  should  be   the   King's   chosen  advisers,  its   own  executive committee.  England  has  thus  passed  from  a  constitutional  to   a parliamentary  system,  and  her  parliamentary  system  is   developing toward  that   of   the   French  Convention,  a   republic   governed  by an   assembly  chosen  by   popular  vote.

7

This  evolution  of   society   and   government  in   a   democratic  sense was  so  contradictory  to   the   aristocratic  constitution  of   English society   that   for   a   long   time   it   remained  unperceived.  It   began forty   years  ago,   though   in   1870   Taine  did   not  notice  it.   And   it really   was  not  produced  by   an   internal  evolution  of   English  society ; it   was   imposed  from  the   outside.  The   change   can  only   be explained  by   the   incongruous  composition  of   the   English  state.

The  United  Kingdom  of   Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  which  we improperly  speak   of   as   England,  is   not,   like   France,  a   real   nation  ; it   is   a   mixture  of   ancient  nations  (English,  Welsh,  Scotch,  and Irish),   brought  under  the   government  of   a   dominant  nation,  but distinct  in   social  organization  and   religion.  One  may  count  as still   another  nation  the   industrial  society   born  since  the   end   of the   eighteenth  century   in   the   desert  regions   of   the   north  and   west of   England.

The  "   old   England,"  the   .England  of   the   south  and   east,  that England  which  had  organized  the   government  and  the   Church, was  aristocratic  and   Anglican,  and   is   still ; docile  under  the   hands of   its   nobility   and   clergy,   it   has   remained  the   mainstay  of   the Conservatives.  But  the   other  nations  of   the   Kingdom  were  attached.   neither  to   the   aristocracy  nor  to   the   Anglican  Church; Scotland  was  democratic  and  Presbyterian,  Ireland  Catholic  and hostile  to   the   English  landlords,  Wales  and  the   new  industrial England  of   the   north  and   west  largely  made  up   of   Dissenters. These  democratic  and  dissenting  societies  were  naturally  opposed to   a   system  which  excluded  them  from  political  power  and   treated their  religion  as   inferior.  It   is   they   who   have  recruited  the   opposition parties   against   the   English   nobility   and   the   Anglican Church.  It   is   the   Irish,   the   Scotch,   the   Welsh,   the   English   of   the north  and  west,  who  have  formed  and  who  still  form  the   mass of   the  Liberal  and  Radical  parties.  It   is   they   who  have: brought  a   democratic  evolution  upon   "   old   England."

But  "   old   England,"  in   possession  of   the   government  and   thej court,  has   used  its   position  to   maintain  its   old   system  and   its supremacy  over  its   subjects  in   the   three  kingdoms;  and  by   resisting innovations  up   to   the   limit   of   patience   of   its   subjects,   it has   succeeded  in   greatly   checking  the   evolution  toward  democracy.* This   explains   why   the   transformation  in   English   institu-

*   The   evolution  toward  democracy  has  taken  place   in   all   the  Englisl colonies  ; it   has   been  more  rapid   and  more  complete  there  than  in   Eng land.

tions   has   been  so  slow  in   proportion  to   the   enormous  forces  set in   motion  by   the   opposition.

In   no  other  European  country  was  the   influence  of   the   democratic party   spread   so   quickly.  It   was   in   England   that   the   political program  of   the   democratic  parties   of   Europe   was   formulated for   the   first   time   in   the   nineteenth  century   (by   the   Radicals in   1819).  No   other  democratic  party   has   stirred  the   masses  in such  numbers  as  the  Radicals,  the   Chartists,  the  Irish  under O'Connell,  and   the   demonstrative  workingmen  of   1866;   England has   been  the   country  of   gigantic  agitations  and   demonstrations. But  these  democratic  masses,  having  respect  for   legality,  yielded before  the   resistance  of   the   aristocratic  government  which,  with force  at   its   command,  easily   held  them  in   check  by   arrests,  coercive laws,   and   display   of   troops.   They   have,   by   manifestation, accomplished  less  in   a   half-century  than  a   handful  of   French  republicans, by   using   force,   accomplished  in   a   single   day.   Further, in   order  to   force   the   Conservative  aristocracy  to   yield,   they   have been  obliged  to   join   themselves  with,   and   place   themselves  under, the   Liberal  aristocracy.  They   have  had  to   content  themselves with  the   partial   reforms  which  their  allies  consented  to   propose. In   this   manner  they   have  established,  under  the   form  of   compromise, a  suffrage  almost  universal - quasi-obligation  of   primary education,  quasi-equality  of   creeds  in   Ireland,  quasi-elective local   administration,  and   quasi-democratic  industrial  legislation.

In   all   these   reforms  the   Liberal  "   general   staff"  has   led;   the democratic  masses  of   workingmen  and  Irishmen  gave  at  the start  the   impelling  force  to   set   the   movement  on   foot ;   and   when, later,   the   crisis   of   the   reform  arrived,  they   insured  its   passage   by overawing  the   Conservative  rulers  by   means  of   imposing  demonstrations. The  old   Radicals  demanded  complete  electoral  reform, and   succeeded  in   extorting  the   partial   reforms  of   1832   and 1867,   each   followed  by   a   series  of   reforms  both  democratic  and independent  of   the   Church.  The  Irish  claimed  and   obtained  political equality   of   creeds. forn,

After  having  acquired,  by   the   right   of   voting,   a   part   in   political power,   the   Radicals  and   the   Irish   have   slowly   won  places   for themselves  in   the   English  Liberal  party  and   have  finally   won  it over  to   their  program  of   home  rule  and  democratic  reforms, until   it   has   become  difficult  to   distinguish  a   Liberal  from  a   Radical or   a   member  of   the   Irish   party.   The   Conservative  party   has

so   far   yielded   to   the   infusion  of   the   Radical-Unionists  that   it now  takes  the   initiative  in   democratic  measures.

Thus  the  old  system,  defended  by   the  privileged  English minority,  was  destroyed  by   the   attack  of   the   non-English  majority; but   the   work   was   done   bit   by   bit.   The   new  system   has been  established  in   the   same  fashion,  without  a   general   plan,   preserving the   Royal   House  and   the   hereditary  peers,  the   privileged Church  established  by   law,   the   unsalaried  elective  officers,  the restrictions  on  the   right   of   voting.  The  remains  of   ancient  institutions have   mingled   with   the   foundations  of   the   new   in   a contradictory  whole,  where  it   is   impossible  to   decide  what  will survive  and  what  will  disappear.  This  is   the   cause  of   the   confused character  of   modern  English   politics.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.

SOURCES.- See  bibliog.  of   chapters  ii.   and  iii.

To   the   reviews,  already  mentioned  add  :   National  Review,  Fortnightly Review,  Nineteenth  Century,  Contemporary  Review,  Free  Review;  all the   articles  are  noted  in   Pcole's  Index.

The  reviews,  the  London  Times,  the  "Annual  Register,"  Hansard's "   Debates,"  and  the   Parliamentary  documents  are  the   principal  sources  for this   period.

WORKS.- ON  THE  GENERAL  HISTORY.- McCarthy,  "   Hist,  of   our  Own Times  from  1880  to   the   Queen's  Jubilee,"  1897,   continues  the  modern  history by   the   same  author.

ON  ELECTORAL  REFORM. - Franqueville  (see   bibliog.  of   chap.   ii.).

Heaton,  "   Three  Reforms  of   Parliament." - Dickinson,  "   Development  of Parliament  in   the   Nineteenth  Century."

ON  MODERN  ENGLISH  INSTITUTIONS. - "The  English  Citizen,"  1881-91, collection  of   monographs  by   different  authors,  for   the   most  part   very  clear and  accurate  :   Traill  (Central  Government),  Walpole  (Electorate  and  Legislature), Wilson   (Finance),  Chalmers  (Local   Administration),  Mai tland   (Justice and  Police),  Elliot  (State  and  Church),  Fowle  (Poor   Law),  Jevons  (Labor Legislation),  Farrer  '(Trade),  and  Craik  (Education). - Anson,  "   Law  and Custom  of   the   Constitution,"  2  vols.,  1890,   a   clear  and   methodical  description (vol.   i.   Parliament,  ii.   Crown).

ON  THE  QUESTION  OF   OBSTRUCTION. - Reynaert,  ' '   Hist,  de   la   Discipline Parlementaire,"  2   vols.,   1884.

ON  DISRAELI'S  POLICY. - Brandes,  "   Lord  Beaconsfield,"  German  trans., 1879.-  Cucheval-Clarigny,  "   Lord  Beaconsfield  et   son  Temps,"  1880.- Kebbel,   "   Hist,   of   Toryism,"  1886. - Froude,  "   Beaconsfield." - Lucy,   "   Diaries"  of the   Parliaments  since  1874.

ON  IRELAND. - See  in   the  "National  Biography  "   the  bibliog.  under  the article  on   Parnell. - King,   "   Irish  Question." - Walsh,  "   Irish  Land  Acts." Bichey,  "   Land  Law  of   Ireland."

ON  THE  SOCIALIST  PARTIES.- Besides  S,   Webb,  "   Hist,  of   T,rade-Unionism,"  see  two  bibliog.  published  by   socialist  groups  :  i.   Fabian  Society, ''   What  to   Read,"  1893  ; II.   Clarion,  "   Catal.  of   Books  on   Socialism,"  1895, which  give   the   list   of   publications  by   the   socialist  societies.  In   French, leEousiers,  "   Le   Trade- Unionism  en   Angleterre,"  1897.

## FRANCE.

CHAPTER  V.

THE  MONARCHY  OF  THE  PROPERTY  CLASS.

The   Bourbon  Restoration.- After  the   decisive  defeat  of   Napoleon and   the   capitulation  of   Paris,   there   was  no   longer   any   government for   France;  the   Allies  undertook  to   provide  her   with   one. They   wished  neither  another  republic'  nor  another  Napoleon. Three  solutions  were  proposed:  *   ist,   Napoleon's  son   (the   King of   Rome),   under  the   regency  of   his   mother,  Arch-Duchess  Marie Louise,  daughter  of   the   Austrian  Emperor;  2d,   a   French  general (the   Tsar   was  thinking  of   Bernadotte);  3d,   the   old   royal   family of   France,  the   Bourbons.  The   King   of   Rome  was   dropped  from the   question,  as   the   choice  of   him   would  have  given   Austria  too much  influence;  the   idea   of   a   French  general   was  a   personal  whim of   Alexander's,  the   other  Allies  would  not   hear  of   it.   The   Bourbons alone   were   left,   and   Alexander  alone  objected   to   them.  In the   interview  at   Langres  with  Metternich  (January,  1814)   he proposed  to   call   upon   the   electoral  assemblies  of   France  to   send deputies  who  should  decide  the   nation's  destiny,   while  the   armies of   the   Allies   kept   down  agitators.  Metternich  refused  to   listen  to any   "   experiment  with  the   principle  of   sovereignty  of   the   people." "   It   would  be,"   he   said,   "   a   new  edition  of   the   Convention, a   new   breaking  forth  of   the   Revolution.  .  .   Besides,  what  question is   this   assembly  to   decide?  The  legitimate  King   is   there."

The  Tsar  finally   agreed   to   the   Bourbons.  The  difficulty  was to   reconcile  the   French  nation.  The  English  government  had introduced  the   principle  that  the   Allies  should  await  the   restoration of   the   monarchy  by   the   French  nation  itself,   that  they might   not  appear  to   have  concerned  themselves  directly  with  the internal  affairs  of   France;  they   would  treat  with  the   government recognised  by   the   French.  Now  the   Allies  had   been  struck  on their   march  through  France  with  the   absence  of   any  mention  of

*   The  discussion  began  at   the   camp  of   Basle  in   January,  1814,   between Metternich  and  Castlereagh,  the  Tsar  being  absent. 103

## 104  THE  MONARCHY  OF   THE  PROPERTY  CLASS.

the   name  of   Bourbon:  the   new  generation  fostered  by   the   Revolution and   the   Empire   no   longer   recognised  the   family.   Metternich  wrote  in   March  :   "   The   invasion  has   shown  in   the   great majority  of   the   French  people   only   an  unexampled  lack  of   interest. .   .   The  French  people  will   never  take  the   initiative  on the   Bourbon  question,  the   principles  avowed  by   the   Allies  forbid them  *o   take   it.   The   Bourbon  princes   must  take   the   matter  into their  own  hands."  The  next  step  was  to   incite  a   demonstration in   favour  of   the   Bourbons.  It   was   Talleyrand  who  organized it.   He   was   in   Paris,   a   member  of   the   regency  established by   Napoleon  during   his   absence;  he   sent  to   the   camp  of   the   Allies a   royalist,   de   Vitrolles;  the   Count  of   Artois  had   sent  another. The  Allies  decided  (March  20)   to   promise  their  support  to   the Bourbon  party   if   it   declared  itself  publicly:  they   would  allow Monsieur  (Charles,  Count  of   Artois)  to   establish  himself  in   the invaded  provinces,  and   place   under  the   management  of   his   partisans all   those  districts  which  declared  themselves  loyal   to   him, guaranteeing  them  impunity  in   any  case.  But   while  supporting the   Bourbons,  the   Allies  gave   them  prudent  advice:  the   English government  engaged  Louis  XVIII.  not  to  show  himself  in France,  Metternich  advised  Monsieur  not  to   bestow  any   office  on an  emigre.

When,  on  the  3ist   of   March,  1814,   the   Allies  entered  Paris, they   were  in   harmony  with  one  another.  The  prefects  had   posted an  announcement  that  the   Tsar  would  take  Paris  under  his   protection; the   Austrian  general,  that  "The  sovereign  powers  are seeking  a  worthy  authority  for   France  which  should  succeed  in establishing  peace  among  all   nations.  To   Paris  the   opportunity has   now  come  to   hasten  the   restoration  of   peace  to   the   world. Only   let   her   announce  her   plan,   and   the   army   before  the   walls  of the-   city   will   sustain  the   decision."  In   the   morning  some  royalist gentlemen,  upon  showing  themselves  with  white  cockades,  were received  with  cries  of   "   Long   live   the   Emperor!  "   The   placards restored  their  courage;  they   went  through  the   streets  with  handkerchiefs tied   to   their   canes,  crying   "   Long  live  the  King!   " Then,  when  the   sovereign  powers  made  their  formal  entry   (by the   gate   of   Saint   Martin),   the   royalists   marched  alongside  of   the Tsar,   crying   "   Long   live   Alexander!  Long   live   the   Bourbons!  "

That  evening  a   discussion  took  place   at   Talleyrand's  house; there  were  eight   present:  the   Tsar  and   his   two  councillors,  the King  of   Prussia,  two  Austrians  (Schwarzenberg  and  Lichtenstein),.   and   two  great   Napoleonic  dignitaries,  Dalberg  and   Talley-

rand.  The   Allies  again   brought  up   the   objection  that   France  did not  want  the   Bourbons.  Talleyrand  undertook  to  secure  their call   to   the   throne  by   official  authority,  and   drew  up   the   declaration of   the   sovereign  powers:  "They  will  no   longer  treat  with Napoleon  Bonaparte  nor  any  member  of   his   family;  they   will respect  ancient  France  as  she   was  under  her   lawful  kings;   they will   recognise  and   guarantee  the   constitution  which  the   French nation  gives   itself.  They   invite  the   Senate  to   appoint   a   provisional government  which  shall   take   the   administrative  duties  upon itself   and   prepare  a   constitution."

The  Senate  appointed  a   provisional  government  of   five   members and   drew   up   a   constitution  maintaining  all   the   imperial   institutions, or,   more  exactly,  all   the   personal  situations  acquired under  Napoleon.  It   guaranteed  to  the   Senate  and  the   Legislative Body   their   continuance  as  an  essential  part   of   the   constitution; to   the   army   its   appropriation,  its   grades   and   distinctions; to   state  creditors  the   recognition  of   their  claims;  to   purchasers of   national  estates  unimpeachable  ownership.  They   promised liberty   of   creed  and   liberty   of   the   press,   liberty   to   express  political opinion.  Thus  the   Empire  was  suppressed  by   the   bodies  established during   the   imperial   regime,   or  rather  by   the   minorities of   those   bodies:  the   Senate  by   62   members  out  of   142,   the   House by   77   out  of   303,   declared  Napoleon  dethroned,  "   the   right   of heredity  established  for   his   family   "   abolished,  the   people   and   the army  absolved  from  their  oath  of   allegiance.  Napoleon,  following the   advice   of   his   marshals,  abdicated  at   Fontainebleau.

Then  the   Senate  alone  decreed:  "The  French  people  of   their own  free  will  summon  to  the   throne  Louis  of   France,  brother of   the   late   King"   and   added  that   the   senators  would  retain  their office  (April   6).   The   Allies  could  then  treat  with  the   French government.  First  they   arranged  with  the   Count  of   Artois  an armistice  to   recall  the   French  troops  scattered  about  in   fortresses outside  of   France  (April   23),   then   the   treaty   of   peace  with   Louis XVIII.  (May   30).   The  Allies  had   been  very  moderate;  they   left to   France  her   territory  of   1792   with   some  extensions,  renounced all   indemnity,  refused  to   allow  Prussia's  claim  for   supplies  to   Napoleon's army,   "   in   order  to   show  their  desire  to   efface  all   traces of   that   unfortunate  period."  They   did   not  even  reclaim  the works  of   art   seized  by   Napoleon  and   placed   in   French  museums.

They   waited  until  Louis  XVIII.  had  published  the  Charter guaranteeing  to   France  a   liberal  monarchy,  then  they,   with  their armies,  left   the   country.

Political  Institutions  under  the   Charter. - The  Allies  had   demanded for   France  a   constitutional  system.  The   Count  of   Artois had  published  a   declaration  which  made  no  mention  of   guarantees. Metternich  himself  demanded  that   the   King   should  bind himself  to  govern  under  constitutional  forms.  Louis  XVIII. arrived  in   France,  refused  to   swear  fidelity   to   the   constitution drawn  up   by   the   Senate  ; but   at   least,   by   the   declaration  of   Saint Ouen  (May  2),   he   formulated  the   principles  on  which  he   meant to   found  the   liberal  constitution  he   promised  to   propose  to   the Senate  and   Legislative  Body :   representative  government  with  two bodies,  the   Senate  and   the   House,  controlling  taxation  ;   responsible ministers;  permanent  judges;  liberty   of   creed,   press,  and   person ;   guarantee  of   ranks,  of   the   national  debt,   of   the   revolutionary land  titles,   and   of   the   Legion   of   Honour;  civil-service  positions to   be   open   to   all   Frenchmen.

The  Constitutional  Charter  (June,  1814)   organized  the   monarchy. The   restoration  of   royalty   was  not   at   all   a   re-establishment of   the   old   regime.  France  preserved  the   social  organization created  by   the   Revolution  and  the   administrative  organization established  by   Napoleon.

The    Revolution    had    created    a    society     founded    on     legal equality,  without  official  recognition  of   classes,  without  an  established church,   without  legal   privileges - a   society   where  no  social advantage  is   hereditary  except  property,  and  where  property  itself is   divided  between  a  great  number  of   inhabitants.     The Empire  had  organized  a   body   of   professional  officials,  divided into   sharply   defined  services  (army,   clergy,   magistracy,  administration,  direct    and     indirect   tax     services,    bridges     and     roads, University),  all   strongly  centralized  under  the   supervision  of   allpowerful  ministers  established  at   Paris  ;   recruited  without  distinctions of   birth  by   a   sort  of   coaptation,  practically  permanent,  and full   of   a   strong   fellow-feeling,  controlling  the   whole  country  with uniform  regulations.     The  nation  in   1814   was  already  provided with  its   social  and   administrative  organization  ; it   remained - as   '' it   still   remains - a   democratic  society   whose  affairs  are  managed  ; by   a   centralized  administration.     The  mechanism  of   the   central  ' government    was    not,     however,    yet     constructed  ;     France    has  ' laboured  to   establish  it ;   she   has   spent   the   nineteenth  century   in , making  herself  a  political  constitution.

Louis  XVIII.  preserved  all   the  institutions  of   the   Empire,, magistracy,  codes,  administration,  Church,  University,  Legion  of' Honour,  banking,  even  the   imperial  nobility.  He   abolished  only1

conscription  and  the   combined  taxes  which  had  made  Napoleon unpopular  (these  were  soon  replaced  by   enlistment  and   indirect taxes).  Nothing  remained  for  him  to   do   but   to   organize  the sovereign  government.  Alexander  and  the   English  advised  him to   adopt   a   representative  system  ;   the   Senate  demanded  it ;   Benjamin Constant  contrasted  it   with   Napoleon's  despotism;  Louis XVIII.  accepted  it.   As   the   English  constitution  was  once  more the   fashion,  France  copied  England,  where  the  constitutional monarchy  had  been  in   operation  for   more  than  a  century,  and transplanted  all   the   English  political  mechanism.  The  government was   divided  between  three  powers  :   the   King ;   the   Chamber of   Peers  chosen  by   the   King,   and   hereditary  like   the   English Lords  ;   the   Chamber  of   Deputies  elected,  like  the   English  Commons, by   property  owners.  As   in   England,  the   lower  houses  had the   primary  control  of   the   budget ; laws  must  be   passed   by   both houses;  the   ministers  could  be   impeached  by   the   Deputies  and tried  by   the   Peers;  members  of   neither  house  were  to  receive pay.   As   in   England,  the   King   had   power  to   choose  his   ministers, sanction  laws,   convoke,  adjourn,  and   dissolve  the   elected house;  and  the  ministers  were  responsible,  that  is   to  say,   the houses  could  call   them  to   account  for   their  political  acts.  The Chambers  must  meet  every  year,  every  act  of   the   King   must  be countersigned  by   a   minister,  the   press  should  be   free ; these  were the  English  guarantees  against  despotism.  They  introduced even  some  English  customs:  the  speech  from  the   throne  at   the opening  of   the   session,  the   address  from  the   Chamber  in   reply. As   in   England,  institutions  were  established  with  a  permanent character  ;   no  provision  was  made  for   revision.

This  system  left   three  political  questions  to   be   solved  :

First.  What  should  be   the   relations  between  the   King   and   the elected  Chamber?  The  question  had  not  yet   been  settled  beyond possibility  of   doubt  even  in   England  (see   p.   12).   Could  the King   choose  any  ministers  he   wished,  according  to   the   old   Tory theory?  or  should  he   take  them  from  the   majority,  according  to the   Whig   theory   ?   This  was  the   leading   question  ; in   a   country administered  exclusively  by   appointed  officials  and   provided  with an   irresistible  standing  army,  the   real  power  is   the   executive power,  which  controls  the   functionaries  and  the   army.  He   who controls  the   ministers  is   the   really   supreme  authority.

Second.  How  should  the  electoral  body   be   composed?  The Charter  fixed  the   amount  of   tax   demanded  as  a   qualification  for voting   (300   francs),   but   did   not  regulate   the   manner  of   election.

## 108  THE  MONARCHY  OF   THE  PROPERTY  CLASS.

Third.  How  should  the   liberty   of   the   press   be   regulated? These  last   two  questions  were  to   be   settled  by   laws   which,  not being   incorporated  in   the   constitution,  would  always   be   open   to change.

Power  to  choose  the  ministers,  electoral  system,  press   laws, were  the  three  grounds  on  which  the   parties  were  destined  to contend  and  political  life   was  to   centre  all   through  the   Restoration.

Conditions  of   Political  Life. - In   order  to   understand  this   history, we   must   look   at   the   conditions  of   French  life   at   this   period. This  requires  an  effort  of   attention,  as  our  current  terms  (electors, chambers,  newspapers)  expressed  entirely  different  meanings  at that   time,   so   much  has   society   changed  since   1814.

Economic  life  in   France  had  been  checked  by   the   imperial wars,  which  had  isolated  the   French  people   and   forced  them  to do   without  the   products  of   English  industry.  An  industrial aristocracy  had   sprung  up,   made  up   of   masters  of   ironworks  and of   thread  and   cloth  factories  in   the   east  and   in   Normandy,  who wished  both  then  and  now  to  monopolize  the  French  market. The  land  aristocracy  of   great  proprietors  tried  to   maintain  the high   price   of   wheat.  As   these  two  aristocracies  together  controlled the   two  Chambers,  they   kept   the   frontier  closed  by   a   system of   customs  duties  which  perpetuated  the   continental  blockade. The   sliding   scale   for   grain   allowed  the   importation  of   wheat only   when  burdened  with  a   duty   which  rose  as   the   price   fell,   in such  fashion  as   to   assure  the   French  producers  a   minimum  price. This  was  an   imitation  of   the   English  corn  laws.  The  protective tariff  on   iron   and   on  cloth  was  prohibitive,  firmly   reserving  the market  to   French  industry.  The  timid  attempts  made  by   the government  to  open   France  to   foreign  commerce  will  only   succeed, up   to   1860,   in   lowering   some  articles  of   the   tariff. ade.

The  workingmen,  since  the  system  established  by   the   Coi stituante,  had   no   longer   the   right   to   associate  for   the   purpose settling  the   terms  of   labour  ; the   penal   code   made  strikes  and   even coalitions  punishable  by   imprisonment.  Labourers  were  therefore obliged   to   remain  isolated  without  other  tie   than  the   remains of   the   old   journeyman  societies  preserved  in   several  trades, subject,  without  defence,  to   the   will   of   the   employers,  and   kept under  watch  by   means  of   the   livret*  They   were  ignorant  and dependent,  without  any  share  in   political  life ;   and   yet   it   was  they

*   A   sort   of   pass-book  carried  by   labourers  showing  where  and   by   whom they   had   been  employed.

vrho   furnished  enthusiasts  and   fanatics  to   recruit  the   secret  societ   es   and   stir   up   riots.  In   the   country  the   tenant  farmers  and metayers,  who  formed  a   large   part   of   the   population,  especially in   the   western  and   central  parts,  were  dependent  on  the   large landowners.  Thus,  in   spite   of   legal   equality,  French  society   was still   divided  into  classes,  a   titled  and  untitled  aristocracy  of great   proprietors  and   great   manufacturers,  a   middle  class  of   petty property  owners  and  functionaries,  a   poor  and   dependent  class  of day   labourers.

The   middle  class  still   led   a   simple,   quiet   life,   the   life   of   the   small town - monotonous,  without  comforts,  without  amusements,  without intellectual  activity,   a   slave   to   public   opinion.  Communication was  still   very   difficult.  There  were  nothing   but   old   roads, badly   laid   out ; ill-kept,   paved   roads  broken  up   by   heavy   teaming (macadamizing  did   not   begin   until  Louis  Philippe's  reign).  Railroads were  not   generally   introduced  until  1848;   travellers  were still   at   the   mercy  of   stage-coaches.  Coaches  which  were  thought to   be   very   quick   took   three   days   to   go   between  Paris  and   Lyons. The   postal   system  was  still   based  on   the   principle  of   postage  paid by   the   receiver;  the   price   was   high;   in   1829   there  were  still   only 1300  post   offices,   and   except   in   the   cities  there  was  no  carrier  to deliver  the   letters.

The   long   wars  had   almost  suspended  11   intellectual  life;   the tradition  was  preserved  by   some  survivors  of   the   eighteenth  century (the   idealogues),  but   the   new  generation  had   received  no regular   instruction.  An   intellectual  restoration  set   in,   and   people began   once  more  to   study   and   to   teach.  The   Faculties  were still   organized  as  special   schools  (called   the   Law  School,  the Medical  School) ;   the   students  were  few,   but   the   public,   eager   for instruction,  went  to   the   public   courses,  read   historical  works,  and exalted  to   the   rank   of   great   savants  their  professors  and   popularizers  (Cousin,  Villemain,  Guizot,  Aug.   Thierry,  de   Barante). Literature,  in   which,  except  for   Chateaubriand  and  Beranger, there   remained  hardly   any   but   strangers  (Mme.  de   Stae'l,   Benj. Constant,  the   de   Maistres),  renewed  itself  by   imitating  foreign   literature. Secondary   education,  left   subject   to   the   monopoly  of   the University,  was  shared  among  the   state  colleges  *   and   the   little Church  seminaries,  which  combined  the   boarding  school  and   the monastery,  with  division  into  classes  and  uniform  studies,  the dead   languages  and   mathematics - that  is   to   say,   the   educational

* The   imperial  name  lycde   was  during  the  monarchy  replaced  by   the old   tame  of   college.

system  of   the   Jesuits.  Primary  education  was  much  neglected, encouraged  neither  by   the   government  nor  the   middle  class;   in 1821  there  were  25,000  communes  without  schools,  and  the   appropriation was   but   50,000   francs;   and   the   Right   wished  to   put a   stop   to   it   altogether.  It   was  only   after   the   law   passed   in   1833 that   the   French  began   to   organize  primary  schools.  The  great majority  of   the   French  could  not  read;   intellectual  life   could hardly   be   said   to   exist   among  the   people.

Religion  had   been  disorganized  ; the   clergy,   few   in   number,  had lost   a   great   part   of   their   influence,  the   middle  class   rarely   attended church,  there  were  almost  no  religious  publications.  In   the Protestant  Church  religious  exercises,  suspended  by   a  century of   persecution,  had   recovered  themselves  only   superficially.  The religious  restoration  of   the   Catholic  Church  was   directed  first   by the   Congregation,  a   private   society   founded  in  1816;   then  by   the Jesuit   houses,  and  after  1830   by   the   Catholic  Liberal  party (Lamennais,  Montalembert,  Lacordaire),  who  succeeded  in   making religion   the   fashion  again.   In   the   Protestant  Church  a   similar restoration,  the   awakening  (reveil),   was   brought   about  by   the action  of   foreign   Protestants.  But  almost  until  1840   religious activity   was  too   feeble  to   have   any   influence  on  political  life.

The  dominant  characteristic  of   the   political  life   of   this   period was  that   it   was   limited  to   a   very   small   portion   of   the   nation.  All manual  labourers,  artisans,  peasants,  small  tradesmen,  almost  all lower  officials,  all   the   lower  clergy,   a   great   part   of   the   middle class   were  excluded.  The  right   of   voting   seemed  such  a   dangerous power   that   they   did   not   dare   to   intrust  it   to   more  than   a small  number  of   the   French  ;   universal  suffrage  recalled  the   Convention and   Napoleon's  plebiscites.  There  was  no   hesitation about  adopting  the   evidence  of   property  furnished  by   the   taxes as  a   basis   of   the   right   of   voting.   The   Charter  fixed  a   qualification so   high   that   it   gave   the   whole  system  a   plutocratic  character. The  nation  was  divided  into  two  classes,  the   great   majority  deprived of   all   political  right,   the   small  privileged  minority  of voters  (until   1830,   with  the   qualification  at   300   francs,   between 88,000  and  110,000;  after  1830,   with  the   qualification  at  200 francs,  between  166,000  and  241,000).  These  voters,  veritable political  grandees,  met  together  at   the   chief  town  and   formed  an electoral  college   (like   the   French  colleges  of   senatorial  electors  at present).  In   this   they   voted  with  written  ballots.

The  political  press   had   the   same  character  of   plutocratic  privilege. Political  journals   had   to   make  a   heavy   deposit   with   the

:rovernment  (ordinarily  200,000  francs)   as  security  for   their  good conduct;  also  to   pay   a   stamp  tax  of   10  centimes  (2   cents)   a   copy, a   postage   duty   of   5   centimes.  Papers  were  not  sold  by   the   single copy,   but   to   subscribers  only   and   at   a   high   price,   each   copy   being burdened  with  a   tax  of   15   centimes.  A   subscription  was  a   luxury reserved  to   the   middle  class,   several  of   whom  often  united  to pay   the   expense.  There  were  very   few   newspapers,  three  or   four to   each   party;   and   their   circulation,  till   about  1830,   did   not  exceed 15,000.   A   secret  report   in   1824   estimated  the   total   number of   copies   of   political   papers  at   41,000   for   the   opposition,  15,000 for   the   government.  In   1830   the   23,000  subscriptions  to   the Constitutionnel  were  considered  a  great  success.  These  papers contained  only   political  and  literary  articles,  anonymous  like those  in   England.  French  people  regarded  it   as  nothing  less than   revolutionary  when  the   Presse,   in   1836,   published  articles  on various  subjects,  and   there  was  a   great   scandal  when  the   Presse, to   cover  expenses,  inserted  paid   advertisements.  The  Restoration papers,  expensive,  empty,  and   monotonous,  bore  no  resemblance to   the   press  of   to-day.  But   they   had,   few   as   they   were, supreme  influence  over  their  subscribers;  each  man,  reading  only one  paper,   had   only   that   paper's   opinion.

On   the   other  hand  the   government,  with  a   susceptibility  which we  cannot  realize,  supervised  the   press;  every  opposition  article which  could  be   suspected  of   offensive  intention  was  referred  to the   courts.  In   1818,   under  a   Liberal  ministry,  the   authors  of   the "   Historical  Library   "   were  condemned  to   six   months'  imprisonment because  "   under  pretext  of   gathering  material  for   a   history of   the   time,   they   selected  and   introduced  into   their  compilation acts  which  had  a  constant  tendency,  through  accompanying notes,  observations,  and   qualifications,  to   cast   disfavour  upon   the government  .  .  .   thereby  denoting  constant  and  deliberate  ill will."  The  law  of   1819,   the   most  liberal  law   passed   under  the Restoration,  still  recognised  as  a  misdemeanour  any  remark against  the   person  of   the   King,   and   prosecuted  for   such  offence an  author  who  spoke  of   the  Swiss  guards  as  satellites  and janissaries.

The   Hundred  Days   and   the   Second  Restoration. - After  the   return of   Louis  XVIII.  it   was  thought  that  France  had  entered upon  political  calm.  The  King   had  kept   the   imperial  officials and  even  Napoleon's  ministers  (Talleyrand,  Fouche,  Baron Louis).  The  majority  of   the   peers  were  former  senators  of   the Empire.  There  had  been  no  elections;  the  members  of   the

Chamber  were  still  those  that  had   assembled  in   1814   to   discuss the   project.  Louis  XVIII.  seemed  to   have  accepted  sincerely  the society   founded  by   the   Revolution,  and   that   society,  rejoicing  at the  end  of   war,  welcomed  the  Bourbons,  "   the  uncontested family  "   (Benj.   Constant).  To   mark  this  reconciliation,  Beugnot   had   made  an   historic  remark  concerning  the   return  of   the Count  of   Artois:  "   Nothing  is   changed  in   France,  there  is   simply one  more  Frenchman."  There  was  no  division  into  political parties;  the   Chamber  was  occupied  only   with  finance.

This  harmony  could  not   last.  The  King,   his   brother,  his   personal associates,  without  any   important  political   act,   offended  or disturbed  French  society  by   the   use  of   obsolete  forms.  The   King called  himself  Louis  XVIII.  and   called  his   first   year  on   the   throne the   eighteenth  year  of   his   reign,   as   if   to   show  that   he   did   not recognise  the   legitimacy  of   the   governments  preceding  him.  He called  himself  King   by   the   grace  of   God,   without  mentioning  the will   of   the   nation;   he   called  the   constitution  by   an  old   name  revived from   the   Middle  Ages,   the   "   Charte  Constitutionnelle,"  and promulgated  it   with  the   formula  "   we  concede  and   grant,"   like   a charter  really   granted,  to   which  the   nation  had   no  right.   He re-established  the   red   musketeers  and   the   body   guards.  The   imperial nobility   was   treated  at   court  with   less   respect   than   was  paid to   the   ancient  nobility.  The   Count  of   Artois,  living   in   the   pavilion of   Marsan,  surrounded  himself  with  emigres,  who  spoke   of taking   possession  of   their  confiscated  property  again.  .This  circle, nicknamed  the   Entresol  Ministry,  was  suspected  of   having   influence over   the   government.  In   the   country  the   Sunday   processions and   compulsory  rest   were  restored.  All   these  measures, unimportant  in   themselves,  were  nevertheless  symbolic  and  gave the   middle  class  the   belief  that  the   court  wished  to   re-establish the   old   regime.  The  change  of   flag   confirmed  this   impression. The  tricolour  flag   was  that   of   the   army,   the   white  flag   that   of   the emigres',  Count  Artois  had  entered  Paris  with  an  escort  wearing  I the   two  cockades.  But  the   King   had   definitely  decided  in   favour   ! of   the   white.  This   change   humiliated  the   army   like   a   symbol   of : defeat.  The  officers,  recalled  from  countries  occupied  by   French  i garrisons,  were  too  numerous  for   the   army   in   time  ,of   peace;  as   \ there  was  no  employment  for   them  they   were  dismissed  on   half-  j pay.  For  minister  of   war  the   King   chose  an  unpopular  general,   j Dupont,  the   man  that   had   capitulated  at   Baylen.

By   these  measures  the   government  had   irritated  the   army.      An   ! imperialist  party   was  organized,  principally  among  army  officers.

Napoleon's  minister  of   police,   Fouche,  made  secret  arrangements with  several  generals  for   the   return  of   the   Emperor.  Napoleon, informed  of   this   by   a   messenger,  arrived  in   France.  Avoiding the   Rhone  valley,  which  the  royalists  controlled,  he   passed through  the   mountains  of   Dauphine  and  came  to   Lyons.  The whole  army  at   once  joined   him  and  resumed  the   tricolour  flag; the   Bourbons,  finding   themselves  deserted,  fled   to   Belgium.  Napoleon, to   keep   his   hold,   was  willing   to   conciliate  the   Liberals and  even  the  Republicans.  He  asked  Benjamin  Constant  to draw  up  a   liberal  constitution;  he   promulgated  it   under  the title  of   the   "   Act   Added  to  the   Constitutions  of   the  Empire," and   even   had   it   ratified  by   universal  suffrage,  inviting every   citizen  to   sign   his   name  in   registers  provided for   this   special   purpose.  One  million  five   hundred  thousand votes  were  polled.  The  new  constitution  established  the same  regime   as   the   Charter,  but   it   was  never  applied.  France's fate   was  to   be   determined  by   war.  The   Allies  refused  to   recognise Napoleon;  their  armies  united  once  more.  The  Waterloo campaign  settled  the   downfall  of   the   Empire   and   the   return  of   the Bourbons.  Napoleon  -abdicated,  proclaiming  his   son,   Napoleon II.,   Emperor   of   the   French.  The   Legislative  Chambers,  however, formed  a  provisional  government  of   five  members,  which  refused to   recognise  Napoleon  II.,   and   governed  in   the   name  of   the French  nation;  then  the  Allies  arrived,  bringing  back  Louis XVIII.  and  the   white  cockade.

Results  of   the   Hundred  Days.  - The  episode  of   the   Hundred days   was  simply   a   military   revolt,   a   pronunciamiento  of   the   army of   Napoleon.  But  in   causing  renewed  interference  from  the Allies   it   produced  incalculable  results  :

First.  There  was,  to   begin   with,   the   invasion,  followed  this time  by   a   long   occupation.  The  Allies,  nov  much  irritated against   the   French,  did   not  treat  them  as   in   1814;   they   demanded a   war   indemnity  of   700,000,000,  payable  in   5   years,  and   the   support of   an  army  of   occupation  of   150,000  men  for   a   period   of   3   to 5   years.

Second.  There  was  a  new  and  less  advantageous  division  of territory.  The   treaty  of   1815   took  away   from  France,  in   addition to   Savoy,   certain  strips   of   her   territory  of   1790,   in   all   half   a million  of   inhabitants.  Again  the  Tsar  and  England  were obliged   to   oppose  the   dismemberment  demanded  by   Prussia,  Austria, and   the   German  princes.

Third.  There  was  at   last   a   profound  change  in   national  and

8

political  sentiments  in   France  and   in   Europe.  The  invasion  of 1814,   short  and   skilfully   managed,  had   left   no   lasting   ill   feeling; the   Allies  had   made  war  simply   against  Napoleon;  they   had   respected France's  internal  independence  and   her   ancient  territory. Napoleon's  return  angered  Europe  against  France.  The  Allies, irritated  because  the  French  had  so  readily  abandoned  their legitimate  King,   were  convinced  that   Europe,  in   the   interests  of peace,  must  ke.ep   supervision  over  such  an   incorrigibly  revolutionary people;   they   determined  to   interfere  in   France's  domestic affairs,   informing  themselves  of   the   state  of   the   different  parties, threatening  the  French  government,  and  arranging  between themselves  to   prepare  armed  interference  in   case  of   internal  revolution (secret   treaty   of   November,  1815).   This  defiant  attitude of   the   European  powers  against  France  became  a  national  feeling, at   least  among  the   Germans.

Fourth.  On   their  part   the   French,  directly   affected  by   the   prolonged invasion,   and   mortified  by   the   mutilation  of   their  territory, regarded   the   conduct  of   the   Allies  in   1815   as  an   insult  and an  abuse  of   power;  patriotism  consisted  henceforth  in   demanding a   new  war  to   efface  the   disgrace  of   the   treaties  of   1815.   The patriots  also  resented  France's  dependent  position  toward  foreign powers,   in   having   to   submit  to   interference  in   home  affairs; this  sentiment  was  expressed  in   hatred  of   the  coalition  improperly termed   the   Holy   Alliance,  and   it   became  the   custom for   the   French  to   represent  themselves  as   hostile  to   all Europe. tom tory,

Fifth.  There  was  a   new   division  of   parties;   France  was  separated into   two   factions:  those   who   had   sided   with   Napoleon  and the   tricolour  flag   and   those   who   had   remained  faithful  to   the   Bourbons and   the   white   flag.   On   each   side   was  a   coalition  without real   political   unity.   The   tricolour  party   were  imperialist  Repub-i licans;  the   Republicans,  joined   to   the   old   soldiers,  ceased  to   re-1 gard   Napoleon  as  a   tyrant;  this   was  the   beginning  of   the   legen-| dary   Napoleon,  the  patriotic  ruler  of   France,  pursued  by   the' hatred  of   the   Allies  because  he   loved  France  too  well,   who   came back  in   1815   to   defend  the   conquests  of   the   Revolution  against the   men  of   the   old   regime.   The   Revolution  and   the   Empire   be-1 came  one.  This  confusion  is   shown  in   the   writings  of   the   time P.-L.  Courier,  Casimir  Delavigne,  and  especially  the   Republican; Beranger,  Napoleon's  old   enemy,  now  the   poet   who  sang  of   im-j perial   glory;   there  are  traces  of   it   in   historical  works  (Thiersi Vaulabelle).  The  party  was  made  up   chiefly   of   the   Emperor's

officers  and  old   admirers,  of   Liberal  middle-class  people  and patriots,   and   workingmen  in   the   large   cities.  It   was  a   military and   patriotic   party ; it   appealed  to   the   hatred  of   foreigners  and   to national  honour;  it   reproached  the   Bourbons  with  having  been "brought  back  in   the   enemies'  baggage,"  with  being   foreign proteges,  with  being   in   league   with  the   "   Holy   Alliance,"  "   murderers of   the   people."  It   was  a   democratic  and  a   lay   party, which  appealed  to   the   hatred  of   the   old   regime   and   accused  the Bourbons  of   wishing  to  restore  tithes,  forced  labour  (corvees), and   feudal  rights,   privileges  of   the   nobility,   the   Inquisition,  and lettres   de   cachet.

Similarly  the   White  Cockade  party  was  not  made  up   solely   of advocates  of   the   Charter  and  of   the   constitutional  monarchy. The  violent  Royalists  were  no   longer   content  with  the   partial restoration  of   1814;   they   wanted  social  restoration,  a  counterrevolution, to   destroy  the   work  of   the   Revolution  without  being agreed  on  the   extent  to   which  they   wanted  the   old   regime  restored. They   attacked  especially  the   retention  of   the   confiscated estates,  and   the   Concordat.  The   Royalists,  "   more  royalist  than the   King,"   nicknamed  the   Ultras,  were  made  up   of   emigres  and country  gentry  chiefly   from  the   western  part   of   the   country;  they regarded  as   their  leader  not  the   King,   but   the   King's   brother, the   future  Charles  X.

From  now  on   France  was  divided  into  irreconcilable  factions. It   was  not,   as   in   England,  simply   a   party   struggle  for   the   general control  of   the   government  and   the   interpretation  of   the   constitution. There   were   two   revolutionary  parties   which  did   not recognise  the   constitution:  the   Ultras,  similar  to   the   English Jacobites  in   the   eighteenth  century,  hating   the   charter  because it   sanctioned  the   Revolution;  the  Liberals  (the   ImperialistRepublican  coalition,  a   party   without  English  parallel),  rejecting the   monarchy  because  the   monarchy  rejected  the   national  flag and   submitted  to   foreign   supervision.

The   Counter-Revolutionary  Crisis  (1815-16). - The  invasion  of 1815   gave   the   power   first   to   the   Counter-Revolutionary  party. The   Royalists,  sustained  by   the   presence  of   the   allied  armies, avenged  themselves  for   the   defections  of   the   Hundred  Days. Their   revenge  took  two   forms :   political  prosecutions  and,   in   the south,  massacres.  The  amnesty  granted  to   "   Misled  Frenchmen "   did   not  extend  to  acts  committed  prior   to   March  23. The   superior  officers  accused  of   having   aided  Napoleon's  return were  tried  by   court-martial  (Ney   before  the   Court  of   Peers);   many

were  condemned  and  shot.  Then  the   Provost  Courts  were  established (December  20,   1815),   formed  of   five   judges   presided  over by   a   military   officer,   for   the   summary  judgment  of   every   individual accused  of   seditious  acts   or   cries.  The   Legislative  Houses passed   laws  giving   the   government  the   right   to   detain  without trial   every  man  accused  of   conspiracy,  and   decreed  the   penalty of   penal   servitude  for   seditious  writings  or  speeches.  They voted  an  amnesty  from  which  they   excluded  all   high   officials of   the   Hundred  Days   and  all   regicides,  that   is   to   say,   the deputies  to  the  convention  which  had  decreed  the  death  of Louis  XVI.

In   the   south,   the   Royalists  of   some  of   the   cities  massacred generals  and  prisoners,  maltreated  Hundred  D'ays   officials,  purchasers of   confiscated  estates,.  Liberals,  and  even  women;  at Nimes,  where  the   Protestants  had   sympathized  with  the   Emperor, violence  took  the   form  of   religious  persecution.  This  mass  of executions,  massacres,  and   disorders,  known  as   the   White  Terror, brought  the   climax  of   party   hatred.

The  Chamber  of   Deputies,  enlarged  to  402  members  (by   a legislative  decree),  was  elected  in   August,  1815,   under  the   influence of   the   invasion  and   of   the   Terror.  .The   election  was  conducted under   the   electoral  system  of   the   Empire,   by   electoral colleges  of   arrondissments  and   departments  made  up   of   electors chosen  for   life.  The  arrondissement  colleges  proposed  candidates from   among  whom  the   department  colleges '   made  their choice;  but   the   prefects   had   had   the   right   to   add   to   the   list   of electors  ten  names  for   each  arrondissement,  twenty  for   each department,  and  many   Imperialist  voters  had  not   dared  to   take part   in   the   election.  The   tricolour  party   was   hardly   represented. The  Chamber  of   Deputies  was  composed  of   a  great  majority  of Ultras  and   a   minority  of   Royalists,  supporters  of   the   Charter  and   ' the   ministry.  The  King,   satisfied  at   first   with  this   unexpected  ' Royalist  unanimity,  called  it   the   Chambre  Introuvable - the   un-   i findable  chamber.

This  harmony  between  the   King   and   the   Chamber  lasted  until the   question  arose,  What  measures  shall  be   taken  against  the enemies  of   royalty?  The   Chamber  passed   exceptional  laws  (sedi-! tious  writings,  provost  courts,  exceptions  to  amnesty).  They abolished  divorce  without  debate  as  a   "disgrace  to   the   Code."; They   also   proposed  to   abolish  some  of   the   institutions  guaranteed by   the   Charter,  the   University,  the   national  debt,   permanent justices,   and   even  demanded  the   restitution  of   the   confiscated  es-

ites.  But  these  attempts  at   restoration  were  checked  by   the peers,  old   imperial  officials  and   natural  protectors  of   the   regime established  by   the   Charter.  Then  the   Chamber  entered  upon  a conflict  with  the  King   over  the  question  of   their  respective powers  and   over  the   electoral  laws.

Louis  XVIII.  had  dismissed  his   Imperialist  ministers  (Fouche,   Talleyrand),  but   had   replaced   almost  all   of   them   with   Royalists of   the   constitutional  party   in   minority  in   the   House,  and had  given   the   presidency  to   the   Duke  of   Richelieu,  a   personal friend  of   Alexander  I.;   he   thus   assured  to   France  the   protection of   the   Tsar  and   facilitated  negotiations  for   the   payment  of   the war   indemnity  and   the   evacuation  of   territory.  Only   three  ministers belonged   to   the   Ultras,   the   party   having   the   majority   in the   House.  They   were  friends  of   the   Count  of   Artois  and   they were  accused  of   forming  with  him  a  secret  council  at   Marsan pavilion.  Their  colleagues  held  aloof  from  them.  The  majority of   the   deputies   protested  against   this   ministry,  which  did   not  possess their   confidence,  and   demanded  a   ministry  of   the   majority, after  the   Parliamentary  plan.   The  King   claimed  his   right   to free   choice  of   ministers,  and   the   minority  of   constitutional  Liberals sustained  him   against   the   majority.  The   orator  of   the   party, Royer-Collard,  thus  clearly   denned  the   theory   of   royal   supremacy: "   If   the   day   should  come  when  the   government  were  in   the hands  of   the   majority  in   the   Chambers,  and   when  that   majority had   the   power   to   dismiss  the   King's   ministers,  then   would  come the   fall,   not   only   of   the   Constitution,  but   of   independent  royalty; then   we  should  have  a   republic   "   (1816). sess acy

At   this   time   were   formulated  the   two  opposing  doctrines  which reappeared  under  Louis  Philippe  under  the   name  of   constitutional monarchy  and  parliamentary  government.  The  constitutional doctrine  recognised  the   King's   right   to   choose  his   ministers  as he   liked,   even  contrary  to   the   wish  of   the   Deputies,  so   long   as he   did   not  govern  contrary  to   the   constitution;  the   King   was acknowledged  head  of   the   executive  power,  the   only   real   power. | and   consequently  master  of   the   nation;  the   legislature  had   over him   no  other  influence  than  the   illusive  right   to   impeach  the   ministers for   violation  of   the   constitution.  The  Parliamentary  doctrine declared  the   King   obliged   to   choose  ministers  from  the majority;  the   executive  power  was  to   be   under  the   rule  of   the Parliament,  which  by   a   vote  of   want  of   confidence  could  compel the   ministry  to   retire.  The  sovereignty  was,   in   this   view,   indirectly transferred  to   the   Chamber  of   Deputies.  In   1816   the   Ul-

## Il8  THE  MONARCHY  OF   THE  PROPERTY  CLASS.

tras  upheld   the   doctrine  of   Parliamentary  rights   against   the   King, and  the  Liberals  defended  the  royal   prerogatives  against  the Royalists.

The  Ultras  wished  also  to   diminish  the   power  of   the   prefects and  to   give   the   local  administration  into   the   hands  of   the   landowners. The   Liberals  defended  the   centralization  established  by the   Empire. owners.

On   the   election  question,  the   Ultras  demanded  election  in   two degrees,  by   canton  and   department,  and   for   the   cantonal  voters the   lowering  of   the   qualification  to   50   francs  of   direct  tax,   which would  mean  the   extension  of   suffrage  to   nearly   2,000,000  voters. They   demanded  also  a   large   House  and   the   complete  renovation of   the   Chamber  every   five  years.  The  King   and  the   Liberal minority  wished  to   preserve  the   system  of   direct  election  with   a small  body   of   voters  (less   than   100,000),  demanding  for   qualification 300   francs  in   taxes;  they   demanded  partial   renovation  and reduction  in   the   number  of   deputies.  The  electoral  law  proposed by   the   Ultras  was  passed   by   the   Deputies  and   rejected   by the   Peers  (March-April,  1816).

The  roles  of   the   parties   seemed  reversed;  it   was  the   old   regime party   that   wished  to   weaken  the   King   that   the   Parliament  might profit;   also   to   enlarge   the   electoral  body,   and   increase  local   autonomy.    It   was  the   Liberal  party  that  sustained  royal   supremacy, the   power  of   the   prefects,   and   a   limited  suffrage.     The   parties   regarded political   mechanism  simply   as  an   instrument  to   secure  for themselves  the   control  of   the   government,  and   cared  less   for   the form  of   government  than  for   the   direction  given   to   public   policy. The  Ultras,  aiming  to   establish  an  aristocratic  system,  wished  to place   the   power   in   the   hands  of   the   country  nobles,  who   would have  had   control  of   the   Chamber,  thanks  to   the   5O-franc  electors. The  Liberals  sought  to  preserve  the  supremacy  of   the  King,! the   prefects,   and   the   3OO-franc  electors,  because  they   were   known to   favour  the   maintenance  of   the   social  regime   founded  by   the   I Revolution. omy.

Louis  XVIII.,  supported  by   foreign  powers,  kept   his   ministry and   resisted  the   Deputies;  he   began   by   closing   the   session  (April, 1816)   and,   without  convoking  it   again,   finally   dissolved  it   (September, 1816).

The   order  for   the   dissolution  re-established  for   the   next   Chamber the   number  of   258   deputies,   as   in   1814.   The   King,   by   a   sim-( pie   ordinance,  changed  the   composition  of   the   House;  it   was  a! coup   d'etat   like   that   of   1830.   To   secure  the   House  of   Peers  the

King  created  new  peers,  naming  former  generals  and  officials under  the   Empire.

During  the   struggle  between  the   King   and   the   Chamber  of Deputies,  the   tricolour  party,  reduced  to   nine  deputies,  had   had no   direct  influence.  The  plots   for   overthrowing  the   monarchy (Didier   at   Grenoble,  the   patriots   at   Paris)   were  nothing   but   isolated attempts,   ignored   or   disowned  by   the   party.

Government  of   the  Constitutional  Party   (1816-20). - The  new Chamber,  meeting  in   November,  1816,   was  made  up   almost  entirely of   Constitutional  Royalists,  supporters  of   the   ministry;  the two  extremes,  the   Liberals  and   the   Ultras,  were  reduced  to   two small  groups.  The  policy   of   the   King   and   his   ministers  was  to maintain  their  power   by   reassuring  those  members  of   the   middle class   who   were  interested  in   supporting  the   Charter,  especially  the purchasers  of   confiscated  estates,  whom  the   "   Chambre  Introuvable"  had  made  uneasy.  Louis  XVIII.  said  in   his   opening speech   to   the   Parliament  : "   May   hatred  cease,  may   the   children  of the   same  country  be   as   brothers."  In   1818  he   said:   "   The   system which  I   have   adopted  reposes  on   the   principle  that   one  cannot  be King   over  two  peoples;  all   the   efforts  of   my   government  are  to make  of   these  two  peoples,  who  unfortunately  dwell  side   by   side, a   united  nation."

A   regular   political   life   now   began.   The   fundamental  question of   supremacy  of   King   or   Deputies  was   dropped;  the   Chamber  left the   King   free   to   choose  his   ministers  and   to   direct  politics   generally, occupying  itself   with   questions  of   finance.  Under  the   Empire the   budget   had   hardly   been   anything   but   a   sham ;   often   exceeded by   the   ministers  and  made  fictitious  by   carrying  over from  one  year   to   another.  In   1817   the   minister  of   war   had   exceeded the   36,000,000  granted;   verification  was  put   off   indefinitely, there   being   no   fixed   term   for   the   liquidation  of   each   budget, and   this   permitted  the   carrying  forward  of   unspent  funds  to   the account  of   another  year.   Instead  of   a   single   budget   there  were several  special   ones  ; the   cost  of   collection  was   deducted  from  the budget   of   receipts,   which  complicated  the   work  of   auditing.  The Chamber  passed  financial  laws  which  determined  in   France  the rules   for   the   formation  and   verification  of   the   budget.  The   law of   1818   obliged   each   minister  to   present  each   year   the   account  for the   work   of   the   past   year,   comparing  the   expenditures  ordered  by him   with   the   appropriations  made  by   the   Chamber;  the   minister of   finance  must  add   to   this   a   general   summing  up   of   the   departmental budgets,   the   account  of   the   gross  receipts,   the   account  of

the   public   debt,   and   the   Treasury  report.   The   House  is   thus   kept informed  of   the   sums  received,  spent,  and  left   on   hand.  The special   budgets  were  gradually  suppressed  (from   1817   to   1829). The  system  was  completed  by   the   suppression  of   the   transfer  of items  from  one  year   to   another  (1822).

The  Chamber  of   Deputies  also   legislated  on   two  political  questions as   to   which   only   general   principles  were  set   forth   in   the Charter,  the   electoral  system  and   the   control  of   the   press.   They adopted  (1817)   the   partial   renewal  of   the   House,  one-fifth  each year,  and   election  by   a   single   college   meeting  at   the   chief   town of   the   department;  each  elector  must  be   30   years  old   and   pay   300 francs  direct  tax,   each   candidate  40   years  old   and   pay   1000   francs in   taxes;  this   was  the   system   demanded  by   the   industrial  uppermiddle  class,   the   mainstay  of   the   Liberal  party.   The   law   on   the press,   long   expected,  was  passed   (1819)   under  the   influence  of   a group  of   admirers  of   the   English   Tories,  the   doctrinaires  (Guizot, Broglie,  Royer-Collard).  This  was  an   imitation  of   the   English system;  no  more  censorship,  jury   trial   for   press  cases,  newspapers subjected  to   stamp  and  deposit  of   security.*  They   had   wanted free   political   papers,  guaranteed  by   the   jury   against   the   abuse  of the   government  power,   but   only   the   journals  of   the   middle  class; in   demanding  an  enormous  deposit  for   the   establishment  of   a   paper   (200,000  francs),   in   imposing  on  each  copy  a   stamp  tax,   they made  the   press  a   luxury   beyond   the   reach  of   the   greater  part   of the   nation.

This  was  a  period  of   reorganization.  French  territory  was evacuated  by   the   armies  of   the   Allies.  The  debt  was  consolidated and   the   budget   balanced.  The   provost  courts  were  suppressed. The   standing   army  was  organized  with   the   system  of drafting  by   lot,   with   the   right   of   getting   a   substitute  and   7   years service  (this   system   lasted  until  1871).   The   University  retained the   monopoly  of   higher   and  secondary  education.  A   Catholic party,   improperly  nick-named  the   Congregation, f had  formed  to strengthen  the  power  of   the   clergy;  they   demanded  the   abolition of   Napoleon's  Concordat.  The  Pope  and  Louis  XVIII. agreed  to   conclude  a  new  Concordat;  the   Houses,  however,  refused.

*   The   deposit  of   money  as  security  for   good   behaviour  was  never  re-  1 quired  in   England. - TR.

f The  Congregation  was  a  private  society  founded  at   Paris  in   1816.  The members  combined  to  carry  on  charitable  work;  they   had  the  same  ideal as   the   Catholic  party,   but   it   is   by   no  means  certain  that  they   were  the leaders  of   it.

All   thi ill   this   time   the   Liberals  were  gaining   strength ;   each   year   they gained   seats;  they   had   25   deputies   in   1817,   45   in   1818,   90   in   1819. The  foreign  powers  were  alarmed  and  urged   Louis  XVIII.  to take   measures  against   these  enemies  of   his   house;  Louis  accepted the   resignation  of   Richelieu,  who   favoured  this   policy   (December, 1818)   and   kept   the   ministers  who   favoured  a   non-partisan  policy (Decazes  ministry).  Then  the   constitutional  majority  which  had supported  the   Richelieu  ministry  divided  into  two  parts.  The Left   Centre  continued  to   support  the   ministry,  the   Right   Centre reproached  the   ministry  with  doing   nothing  against  the   revolution and   proposed   to   modify   the   electoral  law   so  as   to   prevent  the election  of   Liberals  ; finally   it   joined   the   Ultras  against   the   ministry. Decazes  at   first   resisted;   he   had   73   peers  created  in   order   to keep   the   majority  in   the   Chamber  of   Peers,  and  carried  liberal press   law.   But   he   had   against   him   the   Count  of   Artois,   the court,  the   Catholic  party,   and   could  maintain  himself  only   by   the personal  support  of   the   King.   He   decided  to   satisfy   the   Right by   proposing  a   new  electoral  law.  But,   already   weakened  by   the election  of   the   old   Conventionist,  Abbe  Gregoire,  in   1819,   he could  not  resist  the   anger  of   the   Royalists,  who   were  excited  by the   assassination  of   the   Duke  de   Berry   (1820).  The  murderer had   acted   on   his   own   impulse,   but   the   Liberals  were   held   responsible. Louis   XVIII.  resigned  himself  to   desert  Decazes  and took  a  ministry  from  the  Right   (Richelieu),  which  began  the struggle  against   the   Liberals.

Government  of   the  Right  (1820-27). - For  seven  years  the Right   had   the   majority  in   the   Chamber  and   kept   the   ministry  by maintaining  harmony  with  the   King,   first   Louis  XVIII.,  now  old and   weak,   and   after  1824,   Charles  X.,   the   former  leader  of   the Ultras,   personally  favourable  to   the   politics   of   the   Right.   The president  of   the   ministry  was   first   the   Duke  of   Richelieu,  but   the real   leader  of   the   majority   and   of   the   government  was   Villele,   one of   the   Ultra   orators  in   the   "   Chambre  Introuvable"

The   Right,   on  assuming  control,  at   once  cancelled  the   political work  of   the   preceding  years,  the   electoral  and   press   laws.  An ordinance  in   1820  re-established  provisionally  the   full   censorship. The   government's  permission  was  once  more  necessary  for   starting a   paper,  permission  of   the   censors  for   publishing  each  issue, and   any   paper  might   be   suspended  for   six   months  by   mere  executive order.   The   electoral  law   of   1820   enlarged   the   Chamber and   restored  the   electoral  colleges.  The  number  of   members was   increased  to   430,   elected  for   five   years,  and   renewed  in   full   at

each  election,  but   by   two   different  systems:  first,   all   the   qualified voters  meeting  in   colleges,  by   arrondissements,  as   in   1815,   elected 258   members  (since  1816  the  total  membership).  Then  the electors  whose  tax  reached  the  amount  necessary  for  being elected  as  members  (1000   francs)   met   in   colleges   by   departments, to   elect   172   additional  members.  These  latter,  therefore,  had   a double  vote.

The  new  elections  under  this   system   (November,  1820)   resulted in   an  enormous  majority  for   the   Right,   which  decisively  assured the   power  to   the   Ultras.  The   posthumous  birth  of   an   heir   to   the Duke  de   Berry   (the   Count  of   Chambord)  completed  the   consolidation of   the   party   by   assuring   the   succession  of   the   older   branch of   the   Bourbons.

The  tricolour  party,  reduced  to   a  powerless  minority  in   the House,  gave  up   working  by   legal   methods  and   once  more  began to   incite  revolution.  This  was  the   period   of   military  revolutions in   Spain   and   Italy.   The   French  Charbonneric,  modelled  on  the Italian  Carbonari,  was  a  secret  society   divided  into  sections  of twenty  members  called,  as   in   Italy,   venles,  and   directed  by   a   central committee,  the   High   Twenty.  The   object   announced  in   the founding  of   this   society   was  to   give   the   French  the   free   exercise of   their   right   to   choose  their   government,  "   seeing   that   the   Bourbons were  restored  by   foreign   power."  They   talked  of   overthrowing the   Bourbons,  but   they   could  not  agree  on  the   system to   succeed  them,   for   the   revolutionists  were  a   coalition  of   Republicans and   Imperialists.  They   counted  on  accomplishing  their object   by   an   insurrection  (the   Charbonniers  were  under  pledge   to have  arms  always  ready),   and   particularly,  as   in   Spain   and   Italy, by   raising   a   revolt  in   the   army.   They   also   hoped   for   aid   from   the revolutionists  of   other  countries,  with  whom  they   kept   in   touch through  the   Cosmopolitan  Alliance.  It   seems  that  the   Liberal leaders  of   the   Chamber,  Lafayette  and  Manuel,  had  knowledge of   these  revolutionists,  if   they   did   not  encourage  them.  The Free  Masons  reorganized  themselves  about  the   same  time  to   oppose the   clergy,   but   it   has   never   been   proved   that   they   worked in   concert  with  the   secret  political   societies.

Many  attempts  were  made  at   insurrection:  at   Belfort,  at   Colmar,  at   Toulon,  at   Saumur  (1822);  none  of   them  succeeded;! everywhere  the   conspirators  were  executed,  "   the   four  sergeants of   Rochelle,"  affiliated  with  the   Charbonniers,  were  put   to   death.  ; There  were  also  demonstrations  by   the  students  with  cries  of} "   Long   live   the   Charter ! "      This   was  the   motto  chosen  by   the

Liberals,  in   order  not  to   frighten  the  middle  class.  The demonstration  by   the   students  about  Paris  led   to   a   scrimmage  in which  several  persons  were  wounded.

The  Right   continued  to  control  the   House.  They   passed   a press   law   in   1822  which  maintained  the   principle  of   previous authorization  for   newspapers,  and   the   government  right   to   suspend the   publication,  and   gave   the   judgment  of   press  cases  to   the common  courts  composed  of   magistrates  dependent  on  the   government. Censorship  was  abolished,  but   the   ministry  could re-establish  it   by   an  ordinance.  (There   was  even  talk  of   forbidding the   foundation  of   any   new  papers  and   buying   up   the   old ones  one   by   one.)   In   fact,   the   press  was  subject   to   a   system  of prosecutions  and  condemnations  which  made  opposition  almost impossible.  Even  when  the   government  found  no  cause  for   prosecution, they   could  bring   a   "   charge   of   tendency  " - proces   de   tendance- and   have   the   paper  condemned  for   a   series  of   articles, no  one  of   which  was  punishable,  but   which  taken  together  indicated a  subversive  tendency.

The  Right   was  sufficiently  strong  to   oblige   the   King   to   make war  on   Spain   in   order  to   re-establish  absolutism.  Manuel,  for having   recalled  the   execution  of   Louis  XVI.,   was  expelled  from the   Chamber;  the   Liberal  deputies  then  withdrew  (March,  1823). The   ministry,  taking   advantage  of   the   Royalist  sentiment  among the   electors,  carried  the   law   fixing   the   duration  of   the   House  at seven  years.  They   then  dissolved  the   Chamber  and  openly  ordered all   officials  4o   support  government  candidates.  The  keeper of   the   seals   set   forth   in   a   circular  this   principle:  "   Whoever  accepts a   post   in   the   public   service  at   the   same  time   pledges   himself to   consecrate  to   the   government's  service  his   efforts,  his   talent, his   influence."

The   Chamber  elected  under  these  conditions  (February,  1824) was  composed  so   largely   of   Ultras  that   it   was  called  the   Chambre Retrouvee  (found   again);   there  were  only   19   Liberals.  The   ideal held   by   the   majority  was  expressed  during   the   election  period. The   program  of   the   Liberal  papers   (Constutionnel  and   Courrier) said:   "   Electors!  will   you   prevent  the   schemes  which  propose:  ist, to   give   the   clergy   control  of   marriage,  to   assure  them  an   independent income,   and   to   give   them   control  of   the   instruction  of our  youth;  2d,   to   re-establish  the   trade  guilds   and   monopolies; 3d,   to   deprive   the   holders  of   industrial  licenses  of   their  political influence;  4th,   to   introduce  into   legislation  some  means  of   founding a   landed  aristocracy;  5th,   to  grant  compensation  to  the

## 124  THE  MONARCHY  OF   THE  PROPERTY  CLASS.

emigres  (for   the   loss   of   their   estates) ; 6th,   to   interpose  legal   obstacles to  the   subdivision  of   property?"  The  Royalist  Quotidienne  replied :   "   If   the   Liberals  go   to   the   polls   to   prevent  these things,  we  counsel  the   Royalists  to   go   in   order  to   have  these things   done." The  majority  accepted  the  constitutional  system  that  had placed   it   in   power;   but   its   own  wish   was  to   re-establish  a   landed aristocracy  and   the   authority  of   the   clergy.  Louis  XVIII.  died in   1824   and  his   successor  was  the   old   leader  of   the   Ultras, Charles  X.  The  Chamber,  the  Ministry,  and  the   King   were  in harmony  as  to  undertaking  a  work  of   restoration.  Being   unable to   restore  the   confiscated  estates,  which  had   been  guaranteed to   the   purchasers  by   the   Charter,  they   granted   the   dispossessed emigres  a   thousand  millions  of   francs  as  compensation.  The sum  was  raised  by   an   issue  of   bonds ;   and   the   occasion  was  used to  convert  the   outstanding  five  per  cents  into  three  per  cents (1825).  In   1826  a   law   was  passed   against  sacrilege,  punishing with  death  the   theft  of   articles  from  the   churches  and   the   profanation of   sacred  vessels  and   the   host.  The  Chamber  'had   even adopted  the   punishment  of   parricide  for   these  offences,  but   the Peers  rejected  it.   The   act  was  a   symbolic  one,   intended  to   show that   the   law   took   note  of   crimes  against   religion.  The   number  of dioceses  was  increased.  A   bishop  was  appointed  Grand  Master of   the   University.  In   1824   teachers  were  subjected  to   the   supervision of   the   bishops.  Newspapers  were  prosecuted  and  officials dismissed.  »

But  this   policy   aroused  against   the   party   in   power  an  opposition of   three  classes:  the   Liberals,  who  were  directly  attacked; the   manufacturers,  threatened  by   the  landed  aristocracy;  the Gallicans,  disturbed  by   seeing   the   Ultramontanes  strengthened (this   was  the   party   favouring  the   power  of   the   Pope).  An   old Gallican  Royalist,  Montlosier,  in   a   book  that   was  widely   read,   denounced the   Congregation  and   demanded  the   expulsion  of   the Jesuits.  This  order  had  re-established  itself  in   France  contrary to   law,   not   having   received  the   sanction  of   the   French  government. Montlosier  demanded  in   1826  that  the   Articles  of   the Gallican  Church  of   1682  be   taught   in   the   schools.  The   Catholic party   divided.  Some  of   the   bishops  signed   a   declaration  against the   Jesuits;   the   Paris  Court  of   Appeal   declared  the   principles  of the   Jesuits   to   be   incompatible  with  the   Charter.  In   the   Chamber the   Gallicans  left   the   Catholics  and   joined   the   Voltaireans against  the   Ultramontanes.  The  Royalist  party  also  broke  up.

1,Tie   Left   Centre,   dissatisfied  with   the   policy   of   the   Right,   turned Against  the   ministry  and   joined   the   Liberals.  A   group  of   the extreme  Right   went  into  opposition  for   personal  reasons  (it   was called  the   Defection).  The  Chamber  of   Peers,   independent  of   the ministers,  assumed  the   position  of   defending  Liberal  institutions against  the   Chamber  of   Deputies.  It   rejected  the   bill   giving   a double  share  of   the   inheritance  to   the   eldest  son   in   case  of   famiT lies   whose  direct  tax  was  3000   francs  or  upward.  It   stopped  the famous  bill   relating   to   the   press   (nicknamed  the   "   Vandal  Bill   ") which  would  have  compelled  every  newspaper  to   deposit  with  the government  the   manuscript  copy  of   every   issue  five   days   before publication.  It   voted  a   bill   on   juries   which  admitted  as   jurors, in   addition  to   property  owners,  the   members  of   the   learned  professions.

The  ministry  tried  to  crush  opposition.  It   dismissed  officeholders who   opposed   the   new  press   law.  It   closed  the   Normal School.  It   proposed  to   abolish  jury   trial.  The  National  Guard of   Paris,   composed  of   picked   men  of   the   middle  class,   cried  at a   review  by   the   King:   "   Long   live   the   Charter!  Down  with  the ministers!"  It   was  broken  up.   Finally  the   ministry  re-established the   censorship   by   ordinance  in   1827.   The  opposition  replied by   founding  the   Association  for   defending  the   Liberty   of   the Press.  In   order  to  get   a  majority  in   the   Chamber  of   Peers, Villele  created  76   new  peers,  most  of   them  taken  from  among  the deputies.  But  instead  of   retaining  the   Chamber  of   Deputies, which  might   lawfully  have  run  to   1831,   he   had   it   dissolved,  counting on   managing  the   elections  as   in   1824.   In   order  to   give   the opposition  no   time  for   organizing,  he   had   the   elections  appointed for   a   day   only   two  weeks  ahead.

Conflict  between  the   King   and   the   Chamber  (1827-30).- At   the elections  of   November,  1827,   all   the   opponents  of   the   ministry united  against  it:   Liberals,  Left  Centre,  and  Defection.  The voters  were  irritated  by   the   aristocratic  leanings  of   the   Right. The   bondholders  disliked  it   for   the   conversion  of   the   5   per   cents into   3   per   cents  carried  out   in   1825.   The   new   Chamber  had   a strong  opposition  majority,  190   of   them  belonging  to   the   Left. The   Villele  ministry  resigned.  Charles  X.   was  prevailed  on  to take   a   ministry,   not   from   the   majority,   but   at   least   from   the   Liberal Right   Centre,   the   Martignac  ministry  of   January,  1828. This   was  a   return  to   Decazes'  policy   of   conciliation.

The   Martignac  ministry  drew  up   a   conciliatory  speech   from  the throne,  reopened  the   courses  of   Cousin  and  Guizot,  and  made

some  changes  of   prefects.  It   carried,  in   1828,   a   bill   against   election frauds,   requiring  that   the   list   of   voters  be   posted   in   every commune  early   enough  to   give   time   for   corrections  and   additions; also   a   press   act   which  abolished  the   censorship,  the   requirement ,of   previous  license,  and   the   offence  of   tendance.

To   satisfy   the   Gallicans  the   government  by   ordinance  forbade unauthorized  religious  orders  to   have  the   management  of   educational institutions.  In   order  to   maintain  the   monopoly  of   the University,  it   forbade  the   small  seminaries  to   receive  day   pupils, and  limited  to   20,000  the   whole  number  of   their   pupils;   they   were to   receive  only   candidates  for   the   priesthood.  The   bishops  rejected these   measures  at   first,   but   the   government  got   from   the Pope  a  censure  of   their  conduct.  To   satisfy   the   Liberals  the ministry  had   the   King   say   in   the   speech   from   the   throne  in   1829: "   France  knows  as  you   do   on  what  bases  her   welfare  rests,  and those  who  seek  it   elsewhere  than  in   a  sincere  union  of   royal authority  and  the   liberties  that   the   Charter  has   consecrated,  will be   promptly  disavowed  by   her."  It   was  the   Left  that,   for   the first   time,   was  charged   with   drawing   up   the   address  in   reply.

But  Charles  X.   had  endured  this  ministry  with  grudging:  he thought  himself  entitled  to   choose  his   ministers  without  needing the   approval  of   the   Chamber.  "   I   should  prefer   to   saw  wood," said   he,   "   than  to   be   a   King   in   the   position   of   the   English   King." The  members  of   the   Left  itself  gave   the   Martignac  ministry  but feeble  support,  alleging  that  they   had  no  representative  in   it. They   voted  with   the   extreme  Right   against   the   bill   relating   to   the councils  of   the   departments  and   municipalities.  Charles  X.   considered the   attempt  at   conciliation  as  a   failure.  He   said   to   Martignac in   April,   1829:   "   I   told   you   so;   nothing   could  satisfy   those people."  He   waited  till   the   budget  was  voted  and   the   session closed;  then  he   dismissed  the   Martignac  ministry  and  formed a   ministry  of   Ultras,   presided   over   by   one  of   his   personal   friends, an  emigrant,  Count  Polignac.

Charles  X.   exercised  the   royal   prerogatives,  as   Louis  XVIII. had   done  in   1816,   by   governing  with   a   ministry  frankly   opposed to   the   Chamber.  But   Louis  XVIII.  had   had   the   middle  class  and the   cities   on   his   side   against   the   Unfindable  Chamber;  Charles  X. had   them  against   him.  People   began   to   speak   of   legal   resistance. The  Chamber  had  one  indirect  means  of   forcing  the   ministry  to retire,   namely  the   refusal  of   supplies.  If   the   ministry  should attempt  to   levy   taxes  without  legal   authority,  the   taxpayers  would refuse  to&gt;   pay   them.  The  Journal  des   Debats,  an  organ  of   the

Left   Centre,  said,   on   the   loth  of   August,   1829:   "   The   Charter has   now  an  authority  against  which  all   the   efforts  of   despotism will   fail.  The  people   will   pay   a   thousand  millions  to   the   law; they   will   not  pay   one  to   the   ordinances  of   a   minister.  If   illegal taxes  were  demanded,  a   Hampden  would  arise  to   crush  them.  .  . The  article  concluded  with  the   words  "   Unhappy  France!  Unhappy King!   "   The   writer  was  prosecuted  and   condemned,  but was  acquitted  on  appeal.  The  opposition  organized  associations to   resist   the   collection  of   taxes,   in   case  the   ministers  violated  the Charter.  The  first  was  the   League  of   Breton  Resistance;  another was   the   "   Help   Thyself  and  Heaven  Will  Help   Thee,"  in which  Constitutional  Royalists,  such  as   Guizot  and  Broglie, united  with  young   Republicans.  Lafayette,  regarded  as   the   representative of   the   Revolution,  made  a   political  tour  in   the   South. He   was  triumphantly  received  by   the   Liberals  and   Free  Masons.

The  adversaries  of   the   Bourbons  tried  to   take   advantage  of   the general  irritation  to   convert  the   resistance  to   the   ministers  into a   revolution  against   the   royal   family.

There  was  already   in   Paris  a   small  Republican  party   composed chiefly   of   students  and   labouring  men.  It   was   little  known,  for it   had   neither  deputy   nor   journal;   but   it   was   in   communication with  Lafayette  and   ready   to   fight.   It   had   erected  barricades  in 1827,   at   the   time   of   the   elections - the   first   seen   in   Paris  since the   Fronde  (on   the   great   days   of   the   Revolution  the   crowds  went forward  to  attack,  and  did  not  need  to  raise  barricades  for defence).

Another  small  but   very  active  party   was   formed  to   replace   the older  line   of   the   Bourbons  with  the   younger  Orleanist  branch, descended  from  Philippe,  brother  of   Louis  XIV.  Louis  Philippe, Duke  of   Orleans,  son  of   Philippe  Egalite,  had   fought   in   the   Republican army   in   1792.*  Returning  in   1814,   he   had   been  coldly treated  at   court,   but   had   made  himself  popular  with  the   middle class   by   sending   his   sons  to   the   ordinary  colleges  and   by   avowing Liberal  and   Voltairean  opinions.  The  Orleanist  party  was started  secretly   at   a   meeting   held,   in   1829,   at   the   house  of   Talleyrand's niece,   between  two   former  Imperial  ministers,  Talleyrand and   Baron  Louis,  and   two  young  writers  from  the   south,   Thiers and   Mignet,   both  of   them  champions  of   the   Revolution.  It   was decided  to  publish  a   journal,  which  appeared  as  the   National,

*The  public   was  not  aware,  at   that  time,  that,   under  the   empire,  he   had tried   to   take  service  in   the   foreign  armies  :   the   fact  was  not  divulged until   after  1840.

edited  by   Armand  Carrel.  As   was  the   fashion  with  the   Constitutionalists, Carrel   took   his   illustrations  from   English   history.   He wrote  an  article  praising  the   revolution  of   1688:  the   English  nation had   delivered  itself   from   an  oppressive  king   by   avoiding  the republic  and  simply  substituting  one  branch  of   the   royal   family for   another.  The  allusion  was  clear.

The  conflict  between  the   Chamber  and  the   ministry  became open  at   the   beginning  of   the   session  of   1830.   The   speech   from the   throne  said : "   If   culpable   manoeuvres  should  raise  against   my government  obstacles  which  I   do   not  and  must  not  anticipate, my  resolution  to   maintain  the   public   peace  would  give   me  the strength  to   surmount  them."  The  Chamber  replied  in   an  address voted   by   221   deputies:  "   The   Charter  consecrates  as  a   right the   intervention  of   the   nation  in   the   deliberations  regarding  its interests.  It   has   made  the   continuous  agreement  of   the   wishes of   your  government  with  the   wishes  of   your  people  the   indispensable condition  of   orderly   progress   in   public   affairs.  This agreement  does  not  now  exist  "   (March,  1830).  Charles  X.   at once  prorogued  the   Chamber  and  then  dissolved  it.   "   This  is not  a   question  of   the   ministry,"  said   he,   "   but   a   question  of   the monarchy."  The  King,   in   virtue  of   his   royal   power,   believed  he had   the   right,   in   case  of   disagreement  with  the   Chamber,  to   enforce his   own  will.   The   Chamber,  as  representing  the   people (it   was  not  yet   reproached  with  only   representing  the   rich), wished  to   compel  him  to   yield   before  the   will   of   the   nation.  It had   never,  since  1814,   been  necessary  to   decide  the   question - the majority  of   the   Chamber  never  having   resisted  the   King,   except in   the   case  of   the   Unfindable  Chamber,  which  was  not  supported! by   the   nation.  In   1830   the   two   irreconcilable  theories,  sovereignty of   the   King   and   sovereignty  of   the   people,   were  brought squarely  into  conflict.  According  to   the   maxim  borrowed  from England,  the   King   could  not   be   responsible:  the   ministers  alone; could  be.  But   by   upholding  his   ministers,  Charles  X.   had   madei the   fiction  of   irresponsibility  impossible.  The   conflict  was   hence-; forth  between  the   King   and   the   Chamber.

Revolution  of   1830. - Charles  X.   made  some  changes  in   his! ministry  and   ordered  a   new  general   election.  In   the   new   Chamber, instead  of   221  opposition  members,  there  were  270.   The! King,   in   spite   of   the   warnings  of   the   Tsar  and   Metternich,  decided to   crush  the   opposition  by   a   coup   d'etat.  The   French  arm) had   just   taken  Algiers,   and   the   government  was  making  an  alii-; p.nce  with  the   Tsar  for   the   purpose  of   reconquering  the   Rhine

dary.  The  King   therefore  supposed  he   could  count  with :ertainty  on   the   army.   Polignac  had   had   a   vision  of   the   Virgin, who  admonished  him  to   deliver  his   country  from  the   domestic thanksgiving  for   the   victory   of   Algiers,   gave   the   same  counsel.

enemy.  The  Archbishop  of   Paris,  in   conducting  a  service  of The  ministry,  relying   on   Article  14   of   the   Charte,  "   The   King makes  such  regulations  and   ordinances  as  are  necessary  for   the execution  of   the   laws  and   the   safety   of   the   state,"   published  the four   ordinances  of   July   26.   These  dissolved  the   new  Chamber before  it   had   been  called  together,  and   purported  to   change   the laws   regarding  elections  and   the   press.   They   restored  the   censorship and   reduced  the   Chamber  to   258   members,  one-fifth  to   be elected  annually.  The  elections  were  to   be   by   departments,  and none  but   land   taxes  were  to   qualify   for   voting  - a   provision  which would  exclude  the   manufacturers,  nearly   all   of   whom  belonged to   the   opposition.  The  King   and   his   ministers  held  that  their action  was   in   accordance  with  the   constitution.  Polignac  wrote in   a   secret  memoir:  "The  ministers  are  willing   at   need  to   suspend it   in   order  to   strengthen  it."  They   had   so   little  thought  of resistance  that  they   had   only   14,000  soldiers  in   Paris  and  the King   went  on  with  his   shooting  at   Rambouillet.

In   truth   the   Constitutional  party,   in   spite   of   its   majority   in   the Chamber,  was  not  organized  for   a  conflict.     The   ordinances  attacked both   the   Chamber  and   the   newspapers.     But   the   Chamber had   not   yet   met.    The   Constitutionalist  deputies  who   were  about Paris   held   a   meeting   on   hearing   of   the   ordinances,  and   resolved 'on   legal   resistance,  but   were  unable  to   agree  on  practical  measures.   The   Liberal  editors  issued  a   protest:   "The  government has   violated  the   law;   we  are  under  no  obligation  to   obey   it,   we jshall   endeavour  to   publish   our  papers  without  asking   the   permision   of   the   censors.     The   government  has   this   day   lost   the   char.cter   of   legality   which  gives   the   right   to   demand  obedience.     For &gt;ur   part,   we  shall   resist  it;   it   is   for   France  to   judge   ho~w   far   her esistance   shall   extend."     This   was   an    indirect   summons   to evolt;   but   the   press   had   no  means  of   action.     The   revolution 1830   was  the   work  neither  of   the   deputies  nor  of   the   editors. An   armed  force  was  needed  to   oppose  the   troops  in   Paris;  it as   the   party   of   the   tricolour  which  furnished  this.     There  had een   for   some  years   in   Paris  a   revolutionary  party   made  up   of oung  men,  students,  and  labourers.     Their  leader,   Godefroy avaignac,  son  of   a   member  of   the   Convention  of   1792,  wished &gt;   re-establish  the   republic  of   1793.      His   associates  were  lack-

9

ing   in   precise   ideas,   but   hatred  of   the   Bourbons  and   love   of   the tricolour  flag   kept   them  together.  They   were  not  very  numerous, having   from   eight   to   ten   thousand  combatants  at   most.  The government  had  considered  them  unworthy  of   notice.  This  weak and   obscure  organization  it   was  that   made  the   revolution  of   1830. They   were  favoured  by   a   combination  of   exceptional  conditions. 1st,   The   government  was  almost  as   badly   armed  as  the   insurgents, having   only   14,000  soldiers  in   Paris   (there   was  no   Parisian police   force  at   that   date),   and   with   the   flintlocks  still   in   use,   the soldiers  had   no  advantage  in   arms  over  civilians.  2d,   The  Paris of   that   time,   especially  in   the   eastern  portions,  was  a   labyrinth  of narrow  and  crooked  lanes.  It   was  possible,  using   the   large   and heavy   paving  stones  of   the   time,   to   construct  in   a   few   minutes  a barricade  sufficient  to   stop   the   march  of   troops.  Further,  the officers  had   had   no  experience  of   street  fighting.  3d,   The   soldien were  reluctant  to   make  war  on  the   populace.  4th,   The  insur-! gents   hoisted  the   tricolour  flag  - which  the   labourers  and   ever the   soldiers  still   regarded  as   the   national  colours. 01S,

The  struggle  lasted  three  days.      On   July   27   the   Republican! fired   some  shots  and   began   to   build  barricades.     On   the   28th   th&lt;| eastern  section  was   honeycombed  with  barricades;  the   insurgent! took  possession  of   the   City   Hall   and   Notre  Dame  Cathedral,  an hoisted  over  them  the   tricolore.    There  were  no  more  cries  o Vive   la   Charte!    The   cry   now  was   "   Down  with   the   Bourbons! Marmont,  commanding  the  troops,  sent  his   men  forward  in   tw columns,  one  through  the  boulevards  toward  the  Bastille,  th other  along   the   Seine  toward  the   City   Ha1!.     Behind  them,   afte they   had   passed,   the   barricades  were  rebuilt;  the   soldiers,  wor out  with  their  exertions  and   the   heat,   fired   upon   from  window! and   pelted   with   stones,  tiles,   and   pieces   of   furniture,  were  unablj to   pass   the   barricades  of   the   Rue   Saint- Antoine  and,   abandoninj the   east  of   Paris,   retreated  to   the   Louvre.     On   the   2Qth   the   insul gents  took  the   offensive  in   the   western  section,  attacked  tri troops   in   their   barracks,  and   the   Swiss  at   the   Tuileries.     A   nun ber   of   soldiers  of   the   line   joined   the   insurgents.     The   rest  of   tl army  evacuated  Paris.     After  the   fight,   some  of   the   deputie meeting  with    Laffitte,   organized   an    executive   committee   ! "   guard   the   safety   of   person  and   property."    This   committee  e tablished  itself  at   the   Hotel  de   Ville,   restored  the   national  guarj and  placed   military  control  in   the   hands  of   Lafayette.     Charl: X.   had   decided,  after  the   third  day,   to   withdraw  his   ordinanc and   to   make  terms  with  the   insurgents.     The  committee,  ho

rver,   refused  to   receive  his   envoys;   France  was  tired   of   the   Bcurxms.

Paris  was  in   the   hands  of   two  parties   who   had   united  against Charles  X.,   the   Republicans  and  the  Liberal-Royalists.  The brmer  controlled  the   east  of   Paris  and   the   Hotel  de   Ville;   the atter  controlled  the   west  of   Paris  and   the   Chamber  of   Deputies, rhey   adopted  the   tricolour  flag,   but   did   not  want  a   republic.  The mrtisans  of   the   Duke  of   Orleans  took  advantage  of   this   state  of iffairs   to   establish  a   combination  of   royalty   as  represented  by   the younger  branch,  with  the   tricolour  flag   and   the   Charter.  They iivulged  their  plan   gradually.  First  they   posted   a   proclamation Irawn  up   by   Thiers : "   Charles  X.   cannot  return  to   Paris,   he   has &gt;hed   the   nation's  blood.  A   republic  would  expose  us   to   horrible Iissensions,  it   would  embroil  us  with  all   Europe.  The  Duke  of Orleans  is   a   prince   devoted  to   the   cause  of   the   Revolution.  .   t He   was  at   Jemmapes.  .  .   He   is   a   citizen-King.  He   has   borne :he   tricolour  standard  in   the   midst  of   battle,   he   alone  can   bear   it again.   He   awaits  our  call.  Let   us   issue  this   call,   and   he   will accept   the   Charter,  as  we   have  always   wished  it   to   be.  It   is   at the   hands  of   the   French  nation  that   he   will   receive  his   crown." Phen  Laffitte  and   Thiers  went  to   where  the   Duke  was  waiting DUtside  the   city,   and   brought  him  to   Paris.  The  Duke  took possession  of   the   Royal   Palace,   and   declared  himself  only   Lieutenant General   of   the   Kingdom   until   the   opening   of   the   legislative houses.  He   added:  "A  Charter  shall  be   henceforth  a   reality." A.   proclamation  drawn  up   by   Guizot  and   signed   by   91   deputies announced  his   resolution  :   "   The   Duke  of   Orleans  is   devoted  to |:he cause  of   the   nation  and   the   constitution.  .   .   He   will   respect JDiir rights,   for   he   will   receive  his   own   from   us   "   (July   30).   The Chamber  of   Deputies  met  again   and   named  Louis  Philippe  Lieuenant  General  of   the   Kingdom.

I But   at   the   Hotel  de   Ville  there  remained  a  semi-Republican overnment.  Louis  Philippe  made  his   famous  ride  across  the ill   armed  city   and   presented  himself  before  the   Committee  ; there e   had   the   Chamber's  declaration  read,   kissed  Lafayette,  and as   cheered  by   the   people   (July   31).   The   Republicans  made  no ^position,  knowing  that  there  was  no  wish  for   a  republic  in ranee.  Cavaignac  replied  to   Duvergier's  thanks :   "   You  are rong   in   thanking  us,   we   have   yielded   because  we  are  not  ready &gt;r   resistance."

The   revolution  did   not  spread   beyond   Paris  and   Louis  Philippe emained  only   Lieutenant  General.     Charles  X.   tried  to   preserve

the   crown  for   his   family   by   accepting  the   revolution  ; he   appointed the   Duke  of   Orleans  Lieutenant  General,  then  he   and  his   son abdicated  in   favour  of   the   rightful   heir,   his   grandson,  Henry   V., and  intrusted  the   regency  to   Louis  Philippe.  But   the   Chamber, by   a   vote  of   219   to   33   (there   being   but   252   of   the   430   deputies present),  declared  the  throne  vacant,  and  proclaimed  Louis Philippe  I.   King   of   the   French  (August  7).

Charles  X.,   with   his   court  and   his   guard,   had   retired  to   Rambouillet,  where  he   could  continue  the   war.  The   national  guards of   Paris  marched  on   Rambouillet  in   disorder;  but   Charles  made no  attempt  to   resist  them.  He   fled   to   England.  In   France  the news  of   the   revolution  had  been  carried  everywhere,  together with  the   tricolour  flag;   the   people   received  it   with   joy,   happy   in the   restoration  of   the   national  colours.  Not   a   man  made  any   resistance.

The  Political  System  of   Louis  Philippe, - The  revolution  had been  brought  on   by   a   conflict  between  the   King   and   the   people.j Its   result  was  to   proclaim  publicly  the   sovereignty  of   the   people. Thiers'  declaration  said:  "   It   is   from  the   French  people   that   he [Louis  Philippe]  will  hold  his   crown."     Guizot  said:  "He  will! respect  our  rights,   for   it   is   from   us   that   he   will   hold   his."    Louhi Philippe  accepted  this   doctrine.     He   called  himself  "   King   of   th&lt; French  by   the   grace  of   God  and   the   good   will   of   the   nation.' Before  he   took  possession  of   the   throne,  the   Charter  was  read   tc him;   he   signed   it   and   swore  to   uphold   it.      It   was  understood  tha! this   was  no   longer   a   Charter  granted   by   the   King   as   in   1814,   buj a   Charter  imposed  by   the   nation  and   agreed   to   by   the   King.      Th*, Chambers  limited  themselves  to   revising  the   Charter,  but   the   re port  called  the   revised   Charter  a   "   new   establishment,"  an&lt;| defined  its   position  thus:  "   It   is   the   case  of   a   nation,   in   full   posj session  of   its   rights,   saying   to   the   prince   on  whom  it   intends  t| confer  the   crown  : * Lender  the   conditions  written  in   the   law,   wi'! you  reign   over  us?"      In   this   way   the   question  of   the   royzj power  was  settled  by   the   judgment  of   the   people,   that   is   to   sav of   the   Chamber.     Article  14,   which  had   served  as   the   basis  cj Charles  X.'s   coup   d'etat,   was  modified  to   read:  "   The   King   issue! the    ordinances  necessary  for  the  execution   of   the  laws,   bi never  has  power  to   suspend  the  laws  or  prevent  their  ex&lt;!

cution." Guizot's  declaration  had   announced  "   guarantees  for   establisl ing   firm   and   lasting   liberty   ":   the   re-establishment  of   the   nation' guard,   jury   trial   for   press  cases,   "   legally   determined  respons

bi.ity   of   ministers,  the   position   of   soldiers  to   be   regulated  by   law, the   citizens  to   share  in   the   formation  of   municipal  and   departmental administrations."  The  revised  Charter  contained  the promise  of   laws  relating  to   juries,   the   national  guard,   and   municipal and   departmental  organization;  it   also   forbade  the   censorship of   the   press  and   guaranteed  freedom  of   education.  Finally, in   order  to   indicate  the   equality  of   religions  the   formula  "   the Catholic  religion  is   the   religion   of   France  "   was  changed  to   "   the Catholic  religion  is   the   religion   professed  by   the   majority  of   the French."

The  revision  slightly  changed  the   mechanism  of   the   Chambers and   of   the   elections.  The   Deputies  had   the   right   to   elect  their | president  and  to   take  the   initiative  in   law-making  (not   yet   individually for   each  member,  but   collectively)  ; the   age   for   eligibility was   lowered  from  40   to   30   years.

Two  laws  completed  the   revision  :   one   lowered  the   voting   qualification from   300   to   200   francs  in   taxes;  the   other  made  the .peerage  no   longer   hereditary,  but   for   life   only   (1831).

This  new  regime,  called  the   "   July   Monarchy  "   because  it   was the   result  of   the   July   revolution,  was  very   little   different  from   that of   the   Restoration.     The  real  change  consisted  in   giving   the power  to   a   new  set   of   men.     The   royal   family   of   the   Bourbons, bound  by   tradition  to   the   old   regime,   favouring  the   maintenance (of   the   aristocracy  and   the   power  of   the   clergy,   gave  place   to   the (family   of   Orleans,  half   bourgeois  and   Voltairean,  and   obliged   to an  upon   the   Liberal  middle  class.     The   Chamber  of   Peers  had een   deprived  of   half   of   its   former  members  (175   of   the   539   peers efused  to   take   the. oath   of   allegiance  to   Louis  Philippe),  robbed f its   hereditary  privileges,  and   had   lost   its   influence  in   the   govrnment.     Political  power  was  concentrated  in   the   Chamber  of ·eputies;  the   majority  belonged  henceforth  to   the   Liberal  middle ass,   the   enemy  of   the   nobility   and   clergy,   who  gave  political fe   a   tendency  directly   opposed  to   that   of   the   Restoration.

A   new  political  force  was  created  by   the   Revolution  and   recogised   by   the   Charter.    "   The   Charter,  and   all   the   rights   which  it onsecrates,  remain  intrusted  to   the   patriotism  and  courage  of he   national  guards."     The  national  guard,   reorganized  in   1831, ras   composed  of   all   taxpayers  who  could  afford  to   purchase  a niform;  they   elected  their  own  officers  up   to   the   rartk  of   capain.     The   national  guard   of   Paris  took  the   place   of   the   royal uard,   which   had   been   suppressed;   it    was   the    armed   force harged   with  defending  the   government.     It   was,   however,  a

political  organ  as  well.  Louis  Philippe  personally  reviewed  the national  guards   amid  cheers,  which  were  the   principal  manifestation of   public   opinion.  This  political  character  of   the   national guard   was  the   most  original   feature  of   the   July   regime.

Party   Struggle  in   the   Government  (1830-31). - Louis  Philippe, enthroned  by   a   Paris  insurrection,  dubbed  "   King   of   the   barricades "   by   the   legitimists,  had   promptly  to   show  gratitude  to the   insurgents.  A   national  recompense  was  voted  for   the   victims of   the   July   Revolution,  a   monument  was  erected  on   the   site of   the   Bastille  "   in   memory  of   the   citizens  who   died   in   fighting for   the   defence  of   public   liberties."  The   King   gave  an  audience to   "those  condemned  for   political  offences."  The  King   came out  on   foot   with   an  umbrella,  shook  hands  with   the   members  of the   national  guards,   and   allowed  workingmen  to   offer  him   glasses of   wine.  These  democratic  manifestations  supplied  material  for joking  in   the   salons  and   the   legitimist  newspapers;  which  also ridiculed  the   "   insurrection  of   beggars,"  who   had   come  to   demand government  situations,  and   said   that   Lafayette  had   endorsed  70,ooo  requests  for   office.

The  government  remained  divided  into  the   two  parties  which had   conducted  the   Revolution:  the   old   revolutionary  party   of   thej tricolour  flag,   which  had   prepared  the   uprising  against   the   Bourbons and   formed  the   executive  committee  of   the   Hotel  de   Ville (Lafayette,  Laffitte,  Dupont);  the   constitutional  party   (Guizot, Broglie,  Dupin),  which  had  taken  charge  of   the   Chamber  and induced  it   to   accept   the   Duke  of   Orleans.

Louis  Philippe,  in   shaking  off   the   young   Republicans,  had   not dared  to   break  with  the   leaders  of   the   tricolour  party,   who  alone were  making  the  new  order  of   things   popular  in   Paris.  He therefore  called  to   the   government  men  of   both  sections  of   his! supporters;  he   gave  seven  portfolios  to   the   Constitutionalists,  tc| the   Liberals  four   portfolios  and   in   addition  the   command  of   the! national  guards  (Lafayette)  and  the  prefecture  of   the  Sein* (Odilon  Barrot).

There  was  therefore  in   the   ministry  a   continual  struggle  ove: the   general   policy   to   be   pursued.  The   party   of   action  (Lafayette! Laffitte)  wished  to   let   the   so-called  "   consequences  of   July   "   worl| themselves  out.  They   would  sustain  the   democratic  party,  an* resist  the   clergy,   at   home ;   and   would  aid   abroad  the   peoples   wh&lt; rebelled  against  monarchical  governments.  The  party  of   resisii ance   (Guizot,  Broglie,  Casimir-Perier)  declared  the   revolution  a an  end;   they   wished  to   combat  the   Republicans  at   home,   givin;

the   power  to   the   middle  class;   also   to   maintain  peace  abroad  and reconcile  France  with  the   monarchies.

The  party  of   action  had   most  influence  at   first;   jthey   had   the advantage  of   having  the   support  of   the   national  guard   and   the Parisian  insurgents.  Their  policy   was  to   let   the   people   of   Paris show  what  they   wanted.  The  people   wished  first   of   all   the   death cf   the   four   ministers  of   Charles  X.   who  had   signed   the   ordinances. In   order  to   save  them,   the   "   party   of   resistance  "   carried in   the   Chamber  an  address  favouring  the   abolition  of   the   death penalty  for   political  offences.  The  people   rebelled  and   attacked the   Royal   Palace  and   the   fortress  of   Vincennes,  where  the   ministers of   Charles  X.   were  imprisoned.  The  Resistance  section  of the   ministry  resigned,  and   Louis  Philippe,  while  himself  favouring the   Resistance,  gave   the   government  to   the   leaders  of   the   progressive party.   He   hoped   thereby   to   get   done   with   them   more quickly.  This  Laffitte  ministry  (November  2,   i83O-March  13, 1831)   protected  Charles'  ministers  and   the   Court  of   Peers  which tried   them,   by   lining   the   streets  with   soldiers.  The   clergy   having sustained  Charles'  government,  the   Revolution  of   1830   had been  a  victory   for   the   Liberal  Voltaireans  over  the   legitimist clergy.  In   the   country  the   mission  crosses  had  been  thrown down,  priests   and   monks  insulted.  In   Paris  the   mobs  sacked the   Church  of   Saint-Germain-rAuxerrois,  where  the   legitimists had   organized  a   service  in   memory  of   the   Duke  de   Berry;   they demolished  the   Archbishop's  palace   for   hate  of   the   Archbishop, who,   in   1830,   had   advised  Charles  X.   to   make  a  military  coup d'etat.  The  government  made  no  earnest  effort  to   prevent  these outbreaks.  Louis  Philippe  did   not  dare  to   join   publicly  in   the celebration  of   the   mass,  and   therefore  had   a   private   service  in   a private  chapel.  His   coronation  was  conducted  without  any  religious forms. nances.

The  party  of   action  had   for   opponents  the   middle  class,   who were   frightened  at   the   prospect  of   war  and   distressed  by   the   commercial crisis.   Business  was  at   a   standstill.  One   hundred  and fifty   thousand  persons,  it   was  said,   had   left   Paris.  The   unemployed made   public   demonstrations.  The   three  per   cent,  bonds had   fallen  to   52   francs,   the   five   per   cents  to   82   francs.  Laffitte himself  had  to  go   into  liquidation  with  his   banking  house. Louis  Philippe  did   not  want  an  aggressive  foreign  policy;  he forbade  his   ministers  to   interfere  in   Italy   or   in   Poland.  Then  the party   of   action  retired  from  office;  the   party   of   resistance  took the   power  under  Casimir-Perier  (March  13,   1831).

The  new  policy   was  to   consolidate  the   royal   power,  to   secure the   government  to   the   middle  class  by   crushing  the   democratic party,  and   to   maintain  peace  with  outside  powers  by   abstaining from  interference  with  them.  The  Chamber  of   1830   was  dissolved, and   deputies   were  chosen  under  the   new  electoral  system by   the   2OO-franc  voters.  The  ministry  gained  a   distinct  majority. Casimir-Perier  indicated  his   policy   in   the   speech   from   the throne:  "France  has   wished  royalty  to   be   national;  she   has   not wished  it   to   be   impotent."  He   persuaded  the   King   to   leave the   Palais  Royal,   his   ducal  residence,  and   take   possession  of   the Tuileries,  the   King's   palace.  He   passed   a   law   forbidding  armed assemblages.  He  forbade  all   government  officials  to   join   the National  Association,  which  had  been  founded  to  oppose  the Bourbon  and  foreign  influence.  "   France  is   to   be   governed/'  said the   Journal  des   Debats.

Struggle  against  Insurrections  (1831-34). - The  monarchy  of Louis  Philippe  which  had  become  the   government  of   the   middle class,   was  now  attacked  from  two  opposite  sides  at   once.  Two parties  organized  insurrections  for   the   purpose  of   overturning the   government.

The  supporters  of   the   elder  branch,  known  to   their  adversaries as   the   Carlists,   but   calling   themselves  the   Legitimists,  made  at Paris  an  attempt  to   carry  off   the   royal   family   (the   Prouvaires Street  Plot,   February,  1832).  Their  great  power  was,   however, in   the   west,   in   the   old   province   of   Vendee.  It   was  there  that   the Duchess  of   Berry,   mother  of   Henry   V.,   after  an  unsuccessful  attack on   Marseilles,  incited  the   romantic  insurrection  which ended  in   her   capture   (June-November,  1832).  The  Legitimists renounced  war  and  fell   back  on  the   press  as  a   weapon.

The  Republicans  who  reproached  the  Orleanists  with  having "   Jugged   "   tne   revolution  of   1830,   tried   to   bring   on  another  Republican revolution  by   the   same  process  that   had   been  used   with such  success  against  Charles  X.,   riot   and  barricades  in   Paris. They  were  as   in   1830   a  crowd  of   students  and  workingmen, organized  as  armed  secret  societies.  The  object   was  to   re-establish the   republic   of   1793;   their   ideal   was   the   Convention.  Their scheme  was  to   meet  in   arms,  to   barricade  the   tortuous  lanes  of the   Saint-Martin  and  Saint-Denis  quarters,  and  to  watch  for   a favourable  chance  to   march  upon   the   Hotel  de   Ville  and   the   Tuileries and   proclaim   the   republic.  We   must  remember  that   this plan,   which  seems  to   us   inconceivable,  was  proposed  under  conditions which   have   since   disappeared.  There  was  no  political   life

outside  of   Paris,   and   it   was  only   necessary  to   gain   control  of   Paris in   order  to   impose   a   government  on   France.  Paris  was  at   this period   confined  to   the   limits  of   the   twelve  old   arrondissements. The  bourgeois  population  of   the   western  quarters  was  small  and passive;  the   eastern  quarters,  where  the   working  classes  were massed,  especially  on   the   right   bank,   formed  a   strong  place,   easy to   defend  with  barricades  and  near  the   centre  of   political  life, the   Hotel  de   Ville   and   the   Tuileries.  The   government  had   really no  other  defence  but   the   national  guard,   of   which  a   part   could probably  be   led   to   desert.

The  Rights  of   Man  Society  was  organized  like  an  army,   divided into   sections  of   20   members  (to   evade   the   law   which  forbade the   association  of   more  than  20  persons),  each  section  having   a president  and  vice  president;  these  sections  were  grouped  in series,  each  having  its   president.  In   Paris  all   the   later  societies followed  this   system.   In   Lyons   emissaries  of   the   Rights of   Man  Society   created  a   similar  organization.  They   found  the workmen  of   Lyons  excited  by   the   insurrection  of   November, 1831,   which  had   been  merely   an   industrial  outbreak  without  any political  object.  During  the   commercial  crisis  produced  by   the revolution  of   1830   the   silk   manufacturers  had   made  a   reduction in   wages;  the   silk   weavers  of   Lyons,   carrying  on  the   industry in   their   own   houses,   procured  from  the   municipality  and   from  the prefect   permission  to   hold  a   meeting  of   delegates  representing both  the   manufacturers  and   the   workingmen,  to   fix   a   minimum wage.  The  prefect  accepted  the   decision,  but   the   manufacturers refused  it   and   stopped   all   work.  The  weavers  came  down  from the   Croix  Rousse  with  a   black  flag   bearing  the   famous  inscrip-

The  Republican  party  was   directed  by   secret  societies  formed  of the   most  determined  members  of   the   party.  These  men  began the   insurrection,  followed  by   the   malcontents,  especially  workingmen  and  small  boys   who  came  to   help   them  build  barricades and   fight.   Those  who  were  unarmed  went  into  the   house  of   a bourgeois  of   the   national  guard   and   took  his   gun.   When  the government  dissolved  a  secret  society,  the   Republicans  formed  a new  one  under  another  name.  There  were  successively:  the society   of   the   "   People's   Friends,"  dissolved  in   1831,   which  led the   riots   against   the   ministers  of   Charles  X.   and   Saint-Germain1'Auxerrois;  the   society   for   the   "   Rights   of   Man,"   the   most  powerful of   all,   which  directed  the   two  great   insurrections  of   1832 and   1834;   the   society   of   the   "   Families  "   (1837),   and   the   society   of the   "   Seasons  "   which  led   the   insurrection  of   1839.

## 138  THE  MONARCHY  OF   THE  PROPERTY  CLASS.

tion :   Vivre  en   travaillant  ou  mourir  en  combattant  (Live   by   labour or   die   fighting).  After  the   combat  the   weavers  remained  masters of   the   city   for   ten   days.   This  uprising  gave   the   workmen  of Lyons  a  realization  of   their  own  unity   and   power.  The  Republicans organized   them   in   the   form   of   a   mutual  aid   society,   the MuPualists,  divided  into  122   lodges   of   20  members  each,   with  a treasury  and  a  newspaper.

The  Republican  party,  without  counting  the   little  outbreaks  in Paris  in   1830   and   1831*   and   the   Grenoble  riot   (March,  1832), made  two  great   insurrections.

First.  In   1832,   during   the   Legitimist  uprising  in   la   Vendee, on  the   occasion  of   the   funeral  of   General  Lamarque,  the   Republicans, re-enforced  by   Polish,  Italian,  and   German  refugees, gathered  around  the   platform  on  which  the   body   rested  and   proposed to   proclaim  a  republic.  An   insurrection  began   which  for one  night   made  them  masters  of   the   east  of   Paris.  Then  they were  gradually  driven  back  by   the   national  guard   and   25,000  soldiers and   surrounded  in   the   Saint-Martin  quarter,  where  the movement  was  crushed  by   the  battle  of   Saint-Merry  Cloister (June   5-6).

In   the   same  period   the   Republican  party   had   a   political   paper, the   Tribune,  which  attacked  the   King   and   the   government  of   the bourgeoisie,  iJid   some  illustrated  papers   (the   Charivari  and   the Caricature)  which  used  the   King   as   their  butt.  They   represented him  as   juggling  with  Revolution  and  Liberty  as   his   balls,  or fleeing   after   having   cut  the   throat  of   Liberty   (this   was  a   parody of   Prudhon's  picture),  or  pictured  him  with  a   figure   shaped   like a   pear.   In   this   state  of   society,   so  unaccustomed  to   the   liberty of   the   press,   these  attacks  and   caricatures  seemed  an   intolerable insult  to   authority;  the   pear  caricatures  were  prosecuted  as  an outrage  against  the   king.   The  Tribune  in   four  years  was  prosecuted in   times;   20   times  the   editors  were  condemned,  involv-

Second.  In   1834,   rebellion  broke  out  at   Lyons   when  the   government, after   a   strike   by   the   silk-weavers,  proscribed  the   Mutualist   Society   and   arrested  its   leaders.  The   fight   lasted  four   days. The  movement  which  the   Paris  Republicans  were  preparing  was broken  up   by   the   arrest  of   their  leaders,  150   members  of   the Rights  of   Man  Society.  It   amounted  to   nothing  more  than  a fight   in   the   Marais,   rendered  famous  by   the   "   massacre  of   the   Rue Transnonain  "   (April   13-14).

*   That  of   the   Place  Vendome  was  dispersed  by   turning  fire   engines  on the   rioters.

ing   49   years'   imprisonment  and  157,000  francs  in   fines.  The editor-in-chief  was  even  arraigned  before  the  Chamber  of Deputies.

Suppression  of   the   Republican  Party   (1834-35). - In   order  to struggle  against  the   Republicans,  the   Chambers  adopted  a  system of   coercive  laws,   designed  to   restrain  political  liberty   by hindering  the   propagation  and   manifestation  of   Republican  sentiments. They   had   begun   with   offences  against   the   King   and the   Chambers,  against   seditious  placards  (1830)   and   mobs  (1831). The  Deputies  passed  a   law  against  seditious  cries  (February, 1834),   a   law   forbidding  firearms  being   kept   in   houses,  a   law against   associations.  After  the   troubles  in   April   it   was  necessary to   pass   judgment  upon  the   Republicans  arrested  in   Paris,  in Lyons,  and  in   several  other  cities.  The  government,  instead  of referring  them  to   a   jury,   sent  them  before  the   Chamber  of   Peers, constituted  as  a  court  of   justice   to   judge   attempts  against   the peace  of   the   State,   and   combined  all   the   cases  in   one   "   monster prosecution  ":   there  were  164   accused  (over   2000  arrested);  4000 witnesses  were  summoned.

The  accused  refused  to   recognise  the   jurisdiction  of   the   Peers, to   defend  themselves,  to   reply,   or  even  to   appear   before  the   court. The  court  finally   judged   them  without  a   hearing.  The  leaders had   escaped  from  prison.

The  Republicans,  having  lost   almost  all   their  leaders,  made  no more  insurrections.  One  final  coup,   organized  t?y   Blanqui  and Barbes,  with  the   Seasons  Society  (900   members),  fell   through after  a   scrimmage  (1839).  But  some  isolated  Republicans  attempted to   assassinate  the   King.   There  were  in   all   six   attempts against  him  between  1835   and  1846,   the   first   and   most  striking being   that   of   Fieschi  (July,   1835).   The   Chamber  met  these  cases with  the   Laws  of   September.  To   facilitate  the   condemnation  of political  offenders,  they   granted  the   right   of   judgment  in   the absence  of   the   accused  when  they   refused  to   respond  to   a   summons; they   also   lowered  from  eight   (two-thirds)  to  seven (majority),  the   number  of   jurors   necessary  for   conviction.  The press   laws  established  a   penalty  of   imprisonment  and   a   fine   not exceeding  10,000  francs  for   offences  against   the   King's   person,  attack on   the   principles   of   government,  incitement  to   crimes  against the   peace  of   the   State.  These  laws  created  new  press  crimes: it   was   forbidden  to   publish   reports  of   libel   cases  or   the   lists   of jurors   in   libel   cases,  also   to   open   a   subscription  for   the   payment of   fines   incurred  by   a   paper,  or   to   attack  the   principle   of   private

property.  A   censorship  was  established  over  drawings,  caricatures, and   dramatic  productions.  These  laws,   passed   in   spite   of the   third   party,   were  applied   so  as   to   prosecute  every  newspaper article  advocating  a   republic,  every   Legitimist  article  which  spoke of   legitimacy  or  usurpation.  The  Legitimist  papers,   having   more money,  survived  this  regime]  the   Republicans  were  reduced  to papers  printed  secretly.  There  existed  only   the   National,  parliamentary organ   of   the   Left,   which  had   broken  with   the   Revolutionists.

Formation  of  the  Communist-Socialist  Party. - During  the struggle  against   the   monarchy  the   Republicans  separated.  Their common  aim  was  to  re-establish  the   republic  and  universal  suffrage, with   the   Constitution  of   1793.   Cavaignac,  in   the   processes of   1831,   recalled  the   memory  of   his   father - "   one  of   those  who proclaimed  the   Republic  in   the   face   of   all   Europe."  The   society directing  the   party   took  the   name  of   Rights   of   Man,   and   reproduced as   its   program  the   Declaration  of   Rights   of   1793.   But   as to  the  form  the  Revolution  should  take,  opinions  differed. Should  it   be   limited  to   a   political   revolution,  which  should  merely change  the   form  of   government,  or  should  they   make  a  social revolution  aiming  to   improve  the   condition  of   the   poor?  The split   began   on   the   declaration  of   rights.   Instead  of   the   version adopted  by   the   Convention,  Cavaignac  took  up   the   form  proposed by   Robespierre,  which  differed  from  it   in   one  significant  formula: "   Property  is   the   right   that   every  citizen  has   to   the   enjoyment of   the   portion   of   wealth  assured  to   him   by   the   law."  That  is   to say,   property  is   not  a   natural  right;   it   is   one  created  by   law   and subject  to   modification  by   law.  Armand  Carrel,  editor  of   the National,  protested  against  this   doctrine.  The  Republican  party was  rent  in   twain.  The  purely   political  Republicans  adhered  to the  old   program:  the  republic  without  change  of   the  social organization.  They  remained  peaceful,  agitating  chiefly  by means  of   their  organ,  the   National,  and   speeches  in   the   Chamber. The  Socialist  party,  composed  chiefly   of   workingmen  under  the guidance  of   a   few   young  men  of   the   middle  class,   looked  on   the republic  as  an  agency  for   bringing  about  social  reform.

It   was  the   Socialists  who   directed  the   secret  societies,  and   organized the   insurrections;  they   adopted   the   red   flag   which  had   been simply  a   tradition  of   the   former  republic  but   which  became  the .symbol  of   social  revolution,  in   opposition  to   the   tricolour  flag   of the   middle-class  republicans.  The  opposition  between  the   two parties   was   distinctly  set   forth  in   a   manifesto  as  early   as  1832:

"Weh re   have   in   view   not   so  much   a   political   change   as  a   social   reformation. The   extension  of   political   rights,   electoral  reform, universal  suffrage  may   be   excellent  things,   but   simply   as  a   means, not  as  an  end.  Our  object   is   the   equal   division  of   the   burdens and   benefits  of   society,   the   complete  establishment  of   the   reign   of equality."  This  is   the   program  which  in   the   language  of   the government  and  the  property  class  was  termed  the  "   agrarian law   "   or   the   "   equal   division  of   wealth."

In   Paris  the   party   was  made  up   of   working  people   in   the   eastern quarters   (Maubert,  Cite,   Saint-Martin,  Saint-Denis)  and   the faubourgs, - the   old   faubourgs  of   Saint- Antoine,  Saint-Martin,  and Saint-Marcel, - not  the   extensive  suburbs  of   to-day,  which  have formed  new  arrondissements  (Belleville,  la   Villette,  Montmartre, etc.).   These  were  then  only   suburban  villages  without  a   labouring population.  The   members  of   the   new  party   were  not   factory hands,  but  rather  artisans,  carpenters,  blacksmiths,  hatters, tailors,   cooks.  They   had   at   first   only   vague  aspirations - no  precise doctrine.  The   great   prosecution  of   1834   against   the   April insurgents  gave  them  one.  During  their  imprisonment  together for   over  a   year,   the   accused  went  through  their  doctrinal  education; they   became  acquainted  with  a   survivor  of   the   Communists of   1795,   Buonarotti,  the   author  of   the   "   History  of   the   Babeuf Conspiracy."  His  book,  published  in   1820  and  as  yet   little known,  was  now  read  and  studied,  and   it   made  proselytes.  The Babouvist  formulas  may   be   found  in   the   secret  organ  of   the   party, the   Freeman.  In   1829   this   party   itself  took  the   name  of   "   Communist." The   society   of   the   Seasons  asked  itself   this   question: " Are   we   to   make  a   political   or  a   social  reform?"  and   replied:   "A social  reform."  The  way   to   accomplish  this   is   to   create  "   a   dictatorial power  with   authority  to   direct  the   revolutionary  move- ment." At   the   same  time  that   this   Communist  revolutionary  party  of workingmen  was  being   organized,  the   socialist  schools  of   SaintSimon  and  Fourier  were  extending  peaceful  influence  among  the property  class  in   favour  of   a   social  reform  independent  of   politics. Their  ideas  did   not  gain   ground  directly  among  the   working classes.  However,  Louis  Blanc,  editor  of   a   democratic  paper, the   Bon-Sens,  later  of   the   Revue  du   Progres,  adopting  a   SaintSimon  formula,  published  the   "   Organization  of   Labour  "   (1839). He   proposed  as  a   practical  solution  to   establish  at   the   expense of   the   government  national  workshops,  where  the   labourers  should themselves  direct  their  labour  and   share  the   profits.  This   was  not

Babeuf s   old   communism  ; it   was  a   new   doctrine,  at   once  political and  social,  which  began   to   be   called  socialism - a   term  in   use  as early   as  1832.   Louis  Blanc's  theory   was  at   once  adopted  by   the working  classes.  In   1840,   in   connection  with  a   strike  which  was going  on  at  the  time,   Arago  spoke  to  the  Chamber  of   the wrongs  of   the   manufacturing  population,  saying  that  "   labour must  be   organized."  A   deputation  of   workingmen  came  to   thank him  at   the   Observatory  (May).  Then  the   Republicans  arranged a   campaign  of   banquets  for   July   14,   and   Goudchaux  spoke   on   the "   exploitation  of   one  man  by   another."  A   revolutionary  program confiscated  in   1840   said:   "These  are  our  principles.  We want  partnership  of   workingmen  and  abolition  of   the   exploitation of   one  man  by   another.  We   want  to   establish  national  workshops where   the   profits   of   labour  are   divided  among   the   labourers, where  there  shall  be   neither  master  nor  servant."

A   German  named  Stein  wrote  in   1842:   "The  time  for   purely political  movement  in   France  is   past;   the   next  revolution  can  no longer   be   any   but   a   social  revolution."

Parliamentary  Struggles  (1836-40). - During  the  struggle against  the   Republican  parties   the   government  had   remained  in the   hands  of   the   Orleanist  Constitutionalists,  who   had   a  strong majority  in   the   Chamber.  The  ministry  changed  its   leader  several times,   but   it   was  constantly  made  up   of   "   Resistance  "   men, such  as   Broglie   and   Guizot,  or   the   former  Orleanist  agent   Thiers. They   governed  from  1832   to  1836,   except  for   the   interruption known  as   the   three   days   ministry   (November,  1834).   Then  Thiers and  Guizot,  already  rivals,  broke  with  each  other,   and   the   majority was  cut   into   two   parts :   the   Right   Centre  with   Guizot,   the   Left Centre  with   Thiers.  Between  the   two  stood  Dupin's  little  group, the   third   party.   On   either  side   of   these  centre  groups  remained the   two  extreme  parties :   on   the   right   the   Legitimists,  advocating Henry  V.;   on   the   left   the   old   Liberal  party,   which,   not   daring   to declare  itself  Republican,  called  itself  the   Dynastic  Left.

The  two  centres  were  pitted   against   each   other  for   the   control  of the   ministry.  Each  adopted  a   theory  on  the   royal   power,  and the   constitutional  question  which  had  agitated  the   Restoration Chambers  was  revived.  Guizot,  formerly  a   Legitimist,  secretary to   Louis  XVIII.  in   1815,   upheld   the   Tory   doctrine  that   it   was  the King's  prerogative  to  choose  his   ministers, - having  regard  indeed to   the   opinions   of   the   Chamber,  but   not   binding   himself strictly   by   the   will   of   the   majority.  Thiers,  who   upheld   revolutionary principles,   and   conspired  against   the   Bourbons,  main-

tained  the   Whig   theory   that   the   King   should  choose  his   ministers in   accordance  with  the   will   of   the   people,   as  expressed  by   the majority  in   the   Chamber,  and   leave  his   ministers  to   govern  without personal   interference - all   of   which  he   summed  up   in   the formula:  The  King   reigns   and  does  not  govern.  Louis  Philippe, while  not  openly   rejecting  this   theory, - it   was,   indeed,  too  clearly the   doctrine,  admitted  in   1830,   of   the   sovereignty  of   the   nation, - did   not  wish  for   the   role   of   constitutional  King.   He   tried  to direct  'his   ministers  and   to   govern   in   their   name.  He   insisted  in particular  upon  personally  conducting  matters  of   foreign  policy, which  seemed  to   him  to   be   the   King's   own  special   field.  The majority  having  voted  against  Guizot,  he   asked  Thiers  to   form a   ministry.  But  when  Thiers  wished  to   engage  him  in   a  war with  Spain,   he   compelled  'him   to   resign,   and   took  as  prime   minister his   personal   friend  Mole  (September,  1836).

The  two  rival  groups  then  joined   forces  against  the   King's ministry.  This  was  a   struggle  between  the   Chamber,  wishing  to maintain  its   sovereignty,  and   the   King,   trying   to   establish  his   personal power.   The   struggle   was  slow   and   confused.  Mole  had drawn  away   from  the   two  centres  many   deputies  who  were  ready to   support  any  ministry.  When  he   was  put   in   a   minority,  the King   ordered  him  to   form  a  new  ministry  (April,   1837).  The Parliamentarians,  Royer-Collard  and  Barante,  lamented  the decay   of   political   interest.  The   King   was  reproached  with  having interfered  in   the   arrangement  of   matters  which  he   should  have left   to   his   ministers,  and   of   having   interfered  for   the   purpose  of getting  grants  of   money   for   his   family.  People   began   to   talk   of "   personal  government  "   and   "   court  policy."

At   last,   in   1838,   all   the   oppositions,  the   Dynastic  Left,   the   Left Centre,  and   part   of   the   Right   Centre  (the   doctrinaires),  formed a   coalition  against  the   "   court  ministry."  The  campaign  was organized  in   the   press   by   a   former  partisan   of   the   Resistance,  Duvergier   de   Hauranne,  who   made  arrangements  with  the   organs  of the   Left   to   work  together.  "   Substitution  of   parliamentary  government for   personal  government - that  shall  be   our  watchword." He   set   forth   his   political   theories  in   a   book  entitled  "   Principles of   Representative  Government  and  Their  Application  "   (1838). He   marked  out  distinctly  the   difference  between  parliamentary government  and  constitutional  monarchy;  that  in   parliamentary government  "   the   Parliament  is   invested  with  the   final  authority and   possesses  what  modern  political  writers  call   the   last   word." This   had   been   shown  in   the   conflict  of   1830.   "The  Chamber  had

no   idea   of   dethroning  Charles  X.,   and   Charles  X.   did   not  want  to suppress  the   Chamber.  But   Charles  X.   believed  and   said   that   as King   he   should  have  the   last   word,   the   Chamber  believed  and said   that   the   last   word   belonged   to   the   nation,   legally   consulted." The  author  could  conceive  of   no  stable  regime   between  absolute monarchy  and  parliamentary  government.  "   From  the   moment that   the   elections  became  anything  but   a   pretence,  the   deciding voice  must  necessarily  be   given   to  the   voting  body."  Louis Philippe,  it   is   true,   did   not   openly   oppose   the   Chamber,  he   did   not directly   violate  the   constitution  ; but   the   ministry,  "   by   its   unconditional surrender  to   the   dictates  of   the   crown,"   ceased  to   be   a parliamentary  government  in   order  to   become  the   instrument  of the   King's   personal  power.

In   the   Chamber  the   coalition  attacked  the   ministry  by   proposing an   impeachment.  The  discussion  lasted  12   days;   128   speeches were  made - the   great  parliamentary  tourney  of   the   reign.  The coalition  polled   208   votes,  the   ministry  221.  Mole,  holding  his majority  too  small,   dissolved  the   Chamber.  In   the   new   House  he was  in   a   minority  and   so  resigned  (March  8,   1839).   The  coalition was,   however,  only   a   majority  in   opposition;  there  was  not a   majority  for   any   government.  Two  months  went  by   without anyone  being   able  to   form  a   ministry.  The   recret  society   of   the Saisons  (Blanqui  and  Barbes)  took  advantage  of   this   interregnum to   incite  the   last   Republican  insurrection  (May   12).   It   was  then decided  to   form  a   ministry  under  a   military   leader,   Soult.

The  Soult  ministry  was  still   under  the   personal  direction  of   the King,   who  began   once  more  to   solicit  an  endowment  (this   time  in money)  for   his   son,   the   Duke  of   Nemours.  In   the   Chamber,  the committee  on  the   measure  reported  favourably,  but   the   opposition joined   forces   again   and   had   it   rejected   without  discussion,  by secret  ballot  (226   votes  against  220).  The  Soult  ministry retired.

This  was  the   time  when  the   Eastern  question  was  agitating  the middle  classes.  The  British  government  broke  away  from France  and  joined  the  other  great  powers  against  the   French protege   Mehemet  Ali.  The  Allies  of   1814   thus  found  themselves once  more  arrayed  against  France.  The  Left  took  advantage of   the   situation  to   revive  in   the   bourgeoisie  the   feeling   against   Napoleon's old   enemy,  and  reproached  the   King   with  having   been too   friendly   toward  England.  Louis  Philippe  attempted  a   Thiers ministry  in   order  to   satisfy   the   national  spirit   of   the   bourgeoisie (May,  1840).  In   the   Chamber  the   government  no   longer   had   a

majority.  Thiers  could  depend  only   on   the   Left   Centre,  his   own group,  and  on  the   remains  of   Mole's  party,   known  as   the   221. He   had   against   him   the   Legitimist  Right   and   the   Right   Centre, which  did   not  want  a  warlike  policy;  also  the   Left,   which  demanded the   repeal   of   the   September  Laws  and   a   reform  of   the election  laws.  To   reassure  the   Right   he   promised  to   make  no  reforms. He   tried   to   win   over  the   Left   by   personal  attentions (known  as   "   individual  conquests  ")   and   by   patriotic  demonstrations. He   had   Napoleon's  ashes  brought  back  from  St.   Helena, he   recalled  the   soldiers  absent  on   furlough,  he   introduced  a   plan for   the   fortification  of   Paris.  (Two   plans   had   been  proposed,  a fortified  wall   and   detached  fortresses;  the   new  scheme  combined the   two.)

This  policy   of   parliamentary  equilibrium  and   national  "   jingoism," succeeded  in   producing  an   incongruous  majority  (246 against   160),   but   it   could   not   bear   the   test   of   the   Eastern  question. The  city   people  liked  to   see  the   ministry  protest  against  the treaties  of   1815   and   take   an  energetic  stand  before  the   world; but   they   did   not   want  war.  When  Thiers  proposed  to   demand  a credit  for   500,000  men,   Louis  Philippe  refused  and  Thiers  resigned. The   Guizot   ministry   presented  itself   as   the   preserver  of peace   (its   adversaries  said   it   wanted  "   peace  at   any   price   ")   with a   peaceful   speech   from  the   throne.  The   Chamber,  by   a   vote  of 247   against   161,   voted  a   peaceful  address.  "   Peace,  an   honourable and   solid   peace,  which  shall   insure  the   European  balance  of i power  against  every   blow - that  is   our  foremost  wish."     The i Right   Centre  and   the   Centre,   lately   reunited,  formed  a'   majority , against   the   Left.

It   was   during   this   period   of   parliamentary  struggles  that   the Bonapartist  party   began   to   reappear.  Since  the   death  of   Napoleon II.,   the   son  of   Napoleon  L,   in   1832,   the   inheritor  of   the Napoleonic  claims  had   been  Louis  Napoleon,  the   son  of   the   King of   Holland.  He   attempted  to   overthrow  the   government  in   the same  way   that  Napoleon  I.   had  ousted  the   Bourbons  after  his [return   from  the   island  of   Elba,   by   showing  himself  in   France and   calling   the   army  and   the   people   to   him,   in   the   name  of   the glorious  memories'  of   the   Empire  and   of   national  independence. | He   made  two  attempts:  at   Strasburg  in   1836,   where  he   tried  to win   over  a   regiment  of   artillery,  and   again   at   Boulogne  in   1840, where  there  was  not  even  a  scrimmage.

The   Guizot  Ministry  (184048). - Louis  Philippe  had  had  ten ministries  in   as  many  years  up   to   1840;   in   the   next  eight   years   he 10

had  only   one,   the   Guizot  ministry.  In   appearance  this   was  a parliamentary  government.  The  ministry  had  always  a  majority in   the   Chamber,  and   the   majority  increased  at   each  election  (in 1842,   and   in   1846).   The   King   was  therefore  conforming  to   the parliamentary  rule  of   having   only   a   ministry  which  conformed  to the   will   of   the   majority.  He   could  no   longer,   as   in   Mole's  time, be   reproached  with  having   a   personal  government,  for   he   left   the government  to   Guizot,  his   prime   minister.  In   fact,   the   King   had succeeded  in   a   masterly  manner  in   directing  the   government  in the   name  of   Guizot,  and  in   harmony  with  him,   their  personal views  being   the   same.  In   order  to   maintain  their  power,  Louis Philippe  and   Guizot  adopted  a  scheme  fashioned  after  Walpole. Wishing  to   have  the   appearance  of   obeying  the   will   of   the   majority, they   tried   to   secure  a   majority   which  should  have   no  other will   than   the   desire  to   obey   the   ministers.  To   this   end   they   appealed, not   to   their   political   convictions,  but   to   their   private   interests. Guizot's  system  consisted  in   gaining  the   election  of   a ministerial  majority  through  winning  over  individual  electors  by personal  favours,  such   as  offices,   favours  in   stock  transactions,  tobacco licenses  - what   is   known  as  electoral  corruption.  In   order to   keep   his   hold   on   the   deputies,  Guizot  gave   them  places   or   interests in   great  railroad  franchises  and  in   other  great   undertakings which   were   being   started;  at   a   time   when  there  was  no  such thing   as  parliamentary  salaries,  it   was   hard  to   prevent  the   deputies from   seeking   lucrative  offices:  about  200   deputies,  almost half   the   Chamber,  were  office-holders. ests.

The  ministry,  master  of   the   Chamber,  pursued  a  policy  oi order  and   conservatism.  At   home  they   sought   to   avoid  reform thus  maintaining  the   domination  of   the   middle  class;   abroad,  tc assure  peace  and  reconcile  France  with  the  other  Europearl powers.  They   prosecuted  newspapers  which  criticised  their  sys-| tern.  The  National  was  prosecuted  for   an  allusion  to   the   King'; share  in   the   system : "   We   know  well   who   the   chief  culprit   is   anc| where  he   is;   and   France  knows  it   too."  Guizot  lost  the   case but   he   continued  to   prosecute  the   papers  and   finally   obtained  con* demnations.

The  opposition  in   the   Chamber  was  composed  of   the   smal group  of   Legitimists  and   of   the   groups  of   the   Left :   the   Left   Cen-j tre   (Thiers),   the   Dynastic  Left  (Odilon  Barrot),the  Radical  Lef! - a   small  group  of   members  (Arago).  They   reproached  the   mir| istry   with   its   policy   of   corruption,  its   inaction  in   domestic  affairs! and  its   friendly   attitude  toward  foreign   nations,  especially  Eng

d.   This   opposition  was  expressed  in   several  famous  sentences. Lamartine  had  already  said  in   1839:   "The  French  nation  is bored."  He   also   said   in   1842:   "   A   stone  post   could  carry  out   this policy."  A   deputy,  summing  up   the   work  of   the   ministry,  cried : p What  have  they   done  in   seven  years?  Nothing,  nothing,  nothing! "   (1847).  After  the   trial   of   Teste  and   Cubieres,  former  ministers, condemned  for   having   sold   their   influence,  an   interpellation was  addressed  to   the   government;  the   majority  declared  themselves "   satisfied  "   with  the   explanations  made  by   the   ministry. The  deputies  who  voted  for   this   order  of   the   day   were  nicknamed the   "   Satisfaits."  To   these  attacks  Guizot  replied   that  it   was enough  for   him  to   conduct  the   affairs  of   the   nation  wisely;   that he   laboured  to   satisfy   "   the   general   body   of   sane  and   calm  citizens," rather   than   "   the   limited  body   of   fanatics  "   affected  with "   a   craze   for   innovation."

The  opposition  directed  attention  chiefly   to   two  questions:  the English  alliance  and   reform.  The  Left,   which  perpetuated  the   old Liberal  party  of   the   Restoration,  had   remained  hostile  to   England. They   tried   to   excite   the   national  feeling   of   the   middle  class against   the   ministers  by   reproaching  them  with  having   sacrificed the   honour  of   France.  They   had   two  opportunities  to   apply   this policy   in   the   Chamber:  the   convention  on  the   right   of   search, destined  to   put   a   stop   to   the   slave   trade  (1843),   the   Pritchard  indemnity granted   to   an   English   missionary  at   Tahiti  (1844).   The bill   for   the   indemnity  was  so  unpopular  that   the   address  supporting the   ministry   passed   only   by   a   vote  of   213   against   205.   The papers  published  a   list   of   the   deputies   who   had   voted  for   the   indemnity, and   they   were  nicknamed  the   Pritchardists.  Foreign policy   was   from  1842   to   1846   the   principal  ground   of   opposition; the   Left   hoped   to   line   up   against   the   ministry  even  the   deputies who  opposed  reform,  by   making  them  fear   the   public   opinion   excited against   the   English.

In   domestic  policy   *   the   Left   had   not  ceased  since  1830   to   demand reform  in   the   Chamber.  They   brought   forward  two  measures: parliamentary  reform,  designed  to   prevent  parliamentary

*It   may   be   well  to   mention  here  a   dramatic  episode,  lacking  political importance,  the  visit  of   the   Legitimist  deputies  to   Henry   V.,   then  in   London ("   the  pilgrimage  of   Belgrave  Square"),  to  which  Louis  Philippe replied  by   inserting  in   his   address  the   famous  phrase:  "The  public   conscience is   stained  with  shameful  demonstrations."  The  episode  was  the occasion  of   Guizot's  celebrated  reply   to   the  Legitimists  ("   the   height  of my   disdain  .   .   ."   etc.),   1844.

## 148  THE  MONARCHY  OF   THE  PROPERTY  CLASS.

corruption  by   forbidding  deputies  from  holding  offices;  electoral reform,  to   prevent  electoral  corruption  by   increasing  the   number of   voters.  The   Remilly  proposition,  that   the   deputies  should  not be   promised  salaried  offices  nor  obtain  distinctions,  was   killed  by the   Thiers  ministry  (1840).  A   similar  project   failed  of   discussion in   1842.  For  electoral  reform  the   Left  suggested  various schemes.  The  Dynastic  Left  demanded  the   lowering  of   the   taxpaying  qualification  and   the   addition  of   various  new  classes  to   the voting   lists   (jurors,   officers  appointed  by   the   King,   graduates  of faculties,  notaries,  officers  of   the   national  guard,   municipal  councillors in   the   cities).  The   Radical  Left   proposed  to   give   the   right of   voting   to   all   members  of   the   national  guard.   Arago   and   Ledru-Rollin  demanded  universal  suffrage.  The  ministry  rejected all   reforms.  Guizot  replied   that   there  were  enough   voters,  and that  besides  the   number  was  increasing  with  the   wealth  of   the nation ; there  were  already   more  than  200,000.  "   Work  and   grow rich/'   he   said,   "   and   you   will   become  voters."  As   for   universal suffrage,  he   would  not   hear  of   it:   "This  world  is   no  place   for universal  suffrage,  that   absurd  system  which  would  call   all   living creatures  to   the   exercise  of   political   rights."

The  Left  Centre  for   a   long   time  took  no   interest  in   reform. At   last,   however,  in   1845,   tnev   joined   the   Dynastic  Left   (Odilon Barrot)  to   demand  electoral  reform; - a   limited  reform:  the   lowering of   the   property  qualification  to   a   tax  of.   100   francs  and   the addition  of   various  other  franchises.

The  country  was  little  aroused  by   these  discussions  in   the Chamber;  the  result  was  certain  at  the   sfort.  The  ministerial system  was  firmly  established,  its   majority  steadily  increased. The  nation  was  divided  into  two  factions.  On   one  side  were the   King,   the   ministers,  the   Deputies,  and   the   voters  (called   the pays   legal);   these  governed  without  control  and  refused  any changes.  On   the   other  side   stood  all   the   rest  of   the   nation,  including the   King's   sons,  who   were  disgusted  with  the   government policy   and   with   the   ministers.  The   national  guard   of   Paris  had cried  "   Long   live   reform!  "   (1840),   and   since  then   the   King   had ceased  to   review  them.

The  Catholic  and   Democratic  Opposition  Parties. - Outside  the Legislature  were  growing  up   two  parties   as  yet   almost  unknown to   the   official  political   world,   but   very   soon  to   dispute   the   control of   the   government.

The  Catholic  party   had   been  forming  ever  since  1830,   when  the government  had  officially  severed  its   connection  with  the   clergy.

U CATHOLIC  AND  DEMOCRATIC  OPPOSITION  PARTIES. was  no   longer   the   Catholic  party   of   1814,   semi-Gallican  and governmental.  The  Gallicans  had  become  extinct,  taking  with them  the  antagonism  between  the  National  Church  and  the Church  of   Rome,  between  the   secular  clergy   and   the   Jesuits.  In France  as  elsewhere  the   Catholics  of   the   rising   generations  were ultramontane,  devoted  to  the  Pope   and  favouring  the   Jesuits. Their  political  feelings  also   had   changed.  The  clergy,   recruited from  among  the   people,   no   longer   wished  to   establish  an  aristocratic society   or   to   recover  the   Church  estates  confiscated  in   the Revolution.  Their  power  over  the   members  of   the   Church  was sufficient  to   give   them  the   control  of   society.  The   Voltairean middle-class  people,  in   proportion  as   they   grew  stronger  in   their social  superiority,  were  returning  to   the   Church,  now  once  more the   fashion.  They   had   their  daughters  educated  in   the   convents and   began   to   send  their   sons  to   the   Church  schools  which  were getting  re-established.  The  leaders  of   the   Catholic  party,   in opposition  to   the   government,  formed  a   liberal  party;  they   demanded for   the   Church,  not  privileges,  but   simply   liberty. 149

The  Charter  of   1830   had   promised  liberty   of   education.  The Catholics  claimed  the   right   to   establish  Catholic  schools  and to  abolish  the  monopoly  of   the  University.  Montalembert had  begun  the  struggle  by   himself  opening  a  private  school, thus   obliging  the   government  to   prosecute  him  as  an  example. After  the   great   oratorical  successes  of   Lacordaire,  the   Catholic party,  greatly  strengthened,  founded  a   Catholic  newspaper (the   Univers),  which  attacked  the  philosophy  of   the   University as   impious.  The  party  proposed  a  new  law  on  the   liberty of   education  which  was  discussed  in   1844.  The  bishops  protested against   the   University  censorship  over  small  colleges.  The King   held  aloof  from  the   contest.  He   declared  that   he   did   not favour  liberty   in   education,  but   he   said:   "   It   is   never  necessary  to interfere  in   Church  matters;  if   you   once  begin   you  cannot  stop." He   also   said:   "   Do   not  make  me   disturb  my   good   Queen."  (The Queen  was  a   devoted  Catholic;  she   had   personally  implored  the Peers  to  reject   the   divorce  law   passed   by   the   Chamber,  and the   bill   was  in   consequence  defeated.)  The  Chamber  maintained the   University   monopoly,  and   some  Liberals,  fearing   a revival  of   the   Catholic  party,   which  they   had   believed  to   be   dead, manifested  their  anxiety  by   a   campaign  against   the   Jesuits   (1844). Quinet  and  Michelet  attacked  them  in   their  classrooms  at   the College   de   France,  causing  a   tumult  among  the   students.

The   Republican  revolutionary  party   was  reduced  to   the   secret

society  of   the   Seasons,  formed  of   professional  conspirators,  Who were  no   longer   active,   from  lack   of   arms.  They   had   among  their leaders  La   Hodde,  an  agent  of   the   police.  Two  other  societies may   be   named:  the   Communists,  connected  with  the  London Communists  and  the   Icarians,  disciples  of   Cabet;  but   these  took no  part   in   politics.  -There  remained,  however,  a   democratic group,  without  regular  organization,  trying  to   bring   about  a social  transformation  by   means  of   a   political  revolution.  LedruRollin,  the   only   deputy   from  this   party,  said   in   his   profession  of faith   in   1841 : "   To   pass   by   political   paths   to   social  improvement, that   is   the   march  characteristic  of   the   Democratic  party."

A   group  of   Republicans,  discontented  with  the   National,  which had   ceased  to   be   Republican,  founded  in   1843   the   Reform,  which became  the  organ  of   the  Democratic  party.  Their  program, drawn  up   by   Louis  Blanc,  adopted  as   its   principle  equality,   and "association,  which  is   the   essential  form  of   equality."  "The definite  object   of   the   association,"  it   said,   "   is   to   satisfy   the   intellectual, moral,   and   material  needs  of   the   world."  It   demanded universal  suffrage  and  a   salary   for   deputies,  free   education,  compulsory military   service  (without   right   of   offering   a   substitute), and   the   "   organization  of   labour  "   to   "   elevate  the   labourers  from the   condition  of   wage-earners  to   that   of   industrial  partners."  The Democratic  party  adopted  from  its   foundation  a   partly   socialistic program,  and  the   editors  of   the   Reform  held  themselves  in   touch with  the   secret  societies.  But   its   influence  was  very   limited  ; the Reform  never  had  2000  subscribers.

The  agitation  for   social  reforms  continued  to   be   made  by   special reviews  of   the   socialistic  schools,  by   pamphlets  (Cabet, Proudhon,  P.   Leroux),  and  even  by   the   novels  of   George  Sand and   Eugene  Sue.  The  movement  became  sufficiently  marked  to be   noticed  in   a   report  of   the   prefect   of   police   (1846).  This   report spoke   of   the   "   danger  not  of   anarchistic  parties,  but  of anarchistic  publications  which  spread   ideas  of   social  renovation. .   .   .   The  agitators,  despairing  of   obtaining  among  the   masses  by purely  political  preaching  the   results  which  they   expect,  have begun  to  propagate  certain  doctrines  much  more  subversive, borrowed  from  the   dreams  of   Utopians."

Work  of   the   Monarchy  of   the   Property  Classes. - From  1814   to 1848   the   domestic  history   of   France  is   little   but   a   record  of   political contests.  The   court,  the   high   officials,  and   the   wealthy   middle-class people,   who   alone  possessed  the   power,   ignored  the needs  of   the   people;   and   the   people,   excluded  from  the   right   of

voting,   had   no  way   to   compel   a   recognition  of   their   needs.  During the   whole  existence  of   the   "   citizen  monarchy  "   there  were made  only   three  important  reforms  :

First.  The  general  and   municipal  councils,  reduced  under  the Empire  and  during   the   Restoration  to   an   imaginary,  consultative role,   were  reorganized  under  Louis  Philippe  (Martignac's  attempt in   1828  having  come  to   nothing).  The  municipal  councils were  made   elective  in   1831,   the   general   and   district  councils in   1833.   They   were  elected  by   very  small  electoral  bodies  formed of   the   heaviest  taxpayers  and   those  possessing  certain  professional qualifications.  The   government  still   appointed  the   mayors and   their  assistants.  The   powers  of   the   general  councils  of   the departments,  regulated  by   the   law   of   1838,   remained,  as   formerly, very  slight.

Second.  The  severity  of   the   penal   code  was  a   little  softened. The   law   of   1832   abolished  branding,  pillory,   mutilation  of   parricides, and   established  the   system  of   "   extenuating  circumstances  " which  has   lessened  by   half   the   number  of   death  penalties.  The enactments  of   the   commercial  code  were  modified  by   the   bankruptcy law   of   1838;   but   imprisonment  for   debt  existed  up   to   the Revolution  of   1848.

Third.  The  government  had  begun   to   interest  itself  in   primary education.  Guizot  ordered  first  the   investigation  of   1832   regarding primary   education,  which  revealed  the   lamentable  condition of   the   schools.  Many   had   not  even  room  for   the   classes. The  schoolmaster,  receiving  only   the  school  fees  paid   by   the parents,  often  carried  on  another  business.  He   gathered  the children  into  his   room  and  contented  himself  with  keeping them  quiet,   without  teaching  them  anything.  The  law  of   1833 obliged   the   communes  to   support  primary  schools  and   to   assure to   the   teacher  a   lodging   and   a   schoolroom,  a   fixed  salary   and   a pension.  The  school  fee   was  preserved,  but   was  simply   an  additional source  of   income.  The   school  expenses  were  covered by   a   communal  tax  added  to   the   direct  assessment,  and   by   grants from  the   department  and  from  the   national  government.  The teachers  were  to   be   appointed  by   the   municipal  council  and   had to   be   provided  with  certificates  of   competency.  The  primary education  budget  finally   reached  3,000,000  francs  in   1847,   tne number  of   pupils   increasing  from  2,000,000  in   1832   to   3,500,000 in   1848.   The  principle  was  established  that  elementary  education is   a   public   service.

Railroads  did   not   begin   to   be   constructed  until  toward  the

end   of   the   monarchy.  The   Chamber  had   hesitated  long   between the  Belgian  system  of   government  railroads  and  the  English system  of   private   ownership.  After  an  unsuccessful  attempt  in 1838,   they   decided  upon  a  compromise,  the   law   of   1843,   which gave   the   monopoly  to   large   companies  under  government  supervision, subject   to   the   provision  that   the   roads  should  become state  property  at   the   end   of   one   hundred  years.

The  treasury  and  customs  system  of   the   Empire  was  hardly changed.  The  government  of   the   Restoration  tried  to   balance the   budget   and   almost  succeeded;  the   total  deficit  of   fifteen  years was  only   1,200,000,000  francs  (the   billion  granted   to   the   emigres). The  average  annual  expenditure  was  about  1,000,000,000. The  Government  of   July   increased  the   deficit  to   2,500,000,000, with  an  expenditure  of   about  1,200,000,000.  The  normal state  of   the   French  budget  under  the   monarchy  of   the   property class   was  therefore  one  of   deficits,  but   of   small  deficits. Thanks  to  peace  the  general  wealth  of   the  nation  greatly increased - more  rapidly  than  the   population  (30,460,000  in   1821, 34,230,000  in   1841).

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.

There  is   as  yet   no   bibliography  of   recent  French  history.  The  "   Catal. de  1'Hist.  de   France,"  of   the   National  Library,  vols.  iii.   and   iv.,   1856-57, and  vol.   xi.,   suppl.,   1879,   in-4,   gives   a   list   of   all   the   works  in   the   Library   on the  history  of   France  tip   to   1878,   a   list   much  too   long   to   be   of   practical use  as  a   bibliography  ;   it   is   well,   for   works  published  from  1840   to   1890, to   see  Lorenz,   "   Catal.  de.   la   Librairie  Fran§.,"  methodical  tables,  vols. vii.,   viii.,   ix.,   and   xiii.

SOURCES.- The  chief  sources  may   be   classified  under  six  categories  : 1.   Parliamentary  documents. - The  reports  of   meetings  of   the   Chambers and  appendices  (investigations,  reports,  budgets,  documents,  law  projects) have  been  published  day   by   day     in   the  Moniteur  and,   since   1869,   the Journal  OJficiel  (in   Feb.-March,  1871,   the   Moniteur  de   Bordeaux}.     They have  been  partially  reproduced  in   a  retrospective  collection  :   "   Archives Parlementaires,"   "a  complete  collection   of    the   debates,"  which  is   to cover  the  period  from  1800  to   1860  (vol.   Ixxxv.,  issued  in   1893,   goes   to 1834),   and  in   an  annual  collection  which  has  come  out  since  1861  under  the title   of   "   Annales  "   (of   the   Senate,  of   the   Corps   Legislatif,  of   the   National Assembly,  of   the  Chamber  of   Deputies).     The  report  of   the   Chamber  is in   extenso  (stenographic),  except  for  the  period  1852-60,  for  which  there was  only   an  analytical  report.     There  has   been  an  analytical  table  since 1831,   divided  into  seven  series  ;   for   the   period   preceding  1830   the   chronological and   analytical  table  of   the    "Archives  Parl."   (vol.   Ixii,)   fills   its place.

2.   Legislative  documents. - All   official  acts  are  published  in   the   "   Bulletin

des   Lois,"  and   in   Duvergier,  "   Recueil  des   Lois."    The   constitutions  are  all in   F.-A.  Helie,   "   Les   Constitutions  dela  France,"  1879.

3.   Judicial    documents. - The  great  political  prosecutions  before  the Chambers  have  furnished  material  for  special  publications  (see   "   Catal. de   1'Hist.  de   France  ").      Reports  of   the   cases  are  given   by   two  special papers:  Gazette  des  Tribunaux,  since  1826  ;   the   Droit,  since  1836.

4.   Annuals.- The  "   Annuaire  Historique  Universel  "gives  a   summary of   the   events  of   each  year   from  1818  to   1860.

5.   Newspapers  and    reviews. - A   list  of   these  will  be   found  in   the "   Catal.  de   1'Hist.  de   France,"  vol.   iv.     The  leading  papers   for   the   period 1814-48  are  :     the   Journal  des   Dtbats,  the   Constitutionnel,  Liberal  ;   the Quotidienne,  the  Drapeau  Blanc,  Legitimist  ;   the  Courrter  Fran$. ,   the Globe,  Left  ;   the   National,  the   Tribune,  Republican  ;   the   Siecle,  and   the Presse.    The  reviews  are  much  less  important  than  in   England  ;   they are,   for   this   period,   the   Revue  Britannique,  the   Correspondant,  and   the Revue  des  Deux  Mondes.

6.   Memoirs,  letters,  speeches. - The  most  important  are  (I   mention  only the   author's  name  and  the   date  of   publication  of   the   first   volume)  :

FOR  THE  RESTORATION.-  Vitrolles,  1883   ;   Duo  de   Broglie,  1886  ; DeBarante, 1890   ;   Pasquier,  1893   ; Villele,  1890;   Hyde   de   Neuville,  1889.

FOR  Louis  PHILIPPE.-  Guizot,  1858-67  ; H.   Heine,  "   Lutece  "   (journal  correspondence from   1840   to   1843). - S.   Berard,   1834;   Broglie,   Doudan,   Tocqueville. Giquel,   "   Memoires  d'un  Prefet  de   Police,"  1840   (details   on  secret  societies). - Taschereau,  "   Revue  Retrospective,"  1848,   collection  of   the   secret  documents of   Louis  Philippe's  government.

WORKS.- GENERAL  HISTORIES.- Henri  Martin,  "   Hist,  de  France  de 1789   a   nos   Jours,"   8   vols.,   1878-85  ; Dareste,  "Hist,  de   Fr.,"   have  no  scientific value.

Of   the   histories  of   special   periods   the   most  important  are  :

FOR  THE  RESTORATION. - Viel-Castel,  "   Hist,  de   la   Rest."  20  vols.,   1860-78, especially  for   external  history.- Duvergier  de   Hauranne,  "   Hist,  du   Gouvernement  Parl.  en   France,  1814-48,"  10  vols.,  since  1857   (the   work  stops   at   1830), chiefly   for   internal  history. - Dulaure  and  Auguis,  "   Hist,  de   la   Revol.  .   . depuis   1814   jusqu'a  1830,"   8   vols.,   1834-38,  for   the   history   of   conspiracies against  the   Bourbons.- One  can  hardly  make  use  of   the   other  histories, Lubis,  Nettement,  Capefigue,  Rittiez,  Hamel,  Petit,  Rochau  ;   Vaulabelle is   good   only   for   the   story   of   the   Liberals.

FOR  THE  REIGN  OF   Louis  PHILIPPE.- K,   Hillebrand,  "   Gesch.  Frankreichs," 2   vols.,   1877-79  (Gotha  coll.),   begins   at   1830,   interrupted  by   the   author's death  in   1848   ;   far   the   best  history   of   this   period,   written  in   a   very  monarchical spirit,   but   scientific.- Thureau-Dangin,  "   Histoire  de   la   Monarchic de   Juillet,"  7   vols.,   1887-92,  very  monarchical,  adds  a  number  of   new details. - L.Blanc,  "Hist,  de   Dix  Ans,"  (1830-40),  5   vols.,  1841-44,  socialistic, of   little  scientific  value,  and   untrustworthy.

The  most  important  monographs  are  :

ON   THE  WHTE  TERROR.- E.   Daudet,  "   La   Terreur  Blanche,"  1878.

ON  THE  CATHOLIC  PARTY. - In  addition  to   Montlosier,  "   Memoire  a   Consuiter,"  1826  (on   the   discussion  caused  by   this  book  see  the  bibl.  in   the "Catal.  de  1'Hist.  de  France,"  vol.  iii.). - De   Grandmaison,  "La  Congre-

gation,"  1801-30,  1889;  A.   Leroy-Beaulieu,  "   Les   Catholiques  Liberaux  .   .   . de   1830   a   nos   Jours,"  1885;   De   Eiancey,  "   Hist.  Critique  .   .   . de   la   Liberte d'Enseignement  en   France,"  2   vols.,  1844   ;   "   Compte  Rendu  des   Elections de   1846,"   1846.   All   from  the   Catholic  point   of   view.

ON   THE  SOCIALIST  PARTIES.-!.  Stein,  "   Gesch.  der   Sozialen  Bewegung  in Frankreich,"  3   vols.,   1850   (revised  edit.),   remains  the   fundamental  work.

ON   PARLIAMENTARY  INSTITUTIONS.- E.   Pierre,  "   Hist,  des   Assemblies  Politiques   en   France,"  1877   ; G.   Weil,   "   Les   Elections  Legis.   depuis   1789,"   1895. ON   ADMINISTRATION.- E.   Aucoc,  "Conferences  sur  .   .   .   le   Droit  Admi- nistratif,"  3   vols.,   1878.

ON  THE  FISCAL  SYSTEM. - Bibl.  in   A,   Wagner,  "   Finanzwissenschaft," vol.   iii.,   1888. - See   especially  D'Audiffret,  "   Systeme  Financier  de   la   Fr.," 2   vols.,   3d   edit.,   6   vols.,   1868-70,  for   documents. - E.   Stourm,   "   Le   Budget, son  Hist,  et   son  Mecanisme,"  3d   edit.,  1896,  general  account. - L.   Say, "   Diet,   des   Finances,"  in   course  of   publ.   since  1889.

ON   THE  LABOURING  CLASSES.- E.   Levasseur,  "   Hist,  des   Classes  Ouvrieres en   France  depuis  1789,"   2   vols.,   1867.

I

## CHAPTER   VI.

THE  REPUBLIC  AND  THE  DEMOCRATIC  EMPIRE.

The  Revolution  of   1848. - The  chief  characteristic  of   the   monarchy of   the   property  owners  was  to   reserve  all   political  power to   the   limited  class  of   large   tax-payers;  they   alone  formed  the "   pays   legal " - i.   e.,   the   country,   in   the   eye   of   the   law.   All   political life   was  concentrated  in   the   2oo-franc  electors,  the   Chamber, the   ministry,  and   the   King.   The   remainder  of   the   nation  had   no share  in   it.   The   Revolution  of   1848   consisted  in   extending  political rights   to   all   Frenchmen  who   had   attained  their   majority. At   a   single   stroke  it   took  the   power  out  of   the   hands  of   the property  owners,  converted  France  into  a   democracy,  and   transformed all   the   conditions  of   political  life.

It   was  a   sudden  revolution,  unexpected  by   all   save  those  who made  it.  In   1848   Louis  Philippe  and   the   Guizot  ministry,  secure in   their   majority  in   the   Chamber,  were  undisputed  masters  of France.  The  opposition  in   the   Chamber  was  composed  chiefly of   the   Dynastic  Left,   demanding  electoral  reform,  but   not   desiring either   a   republic   or  universal  suffrage.  The  Republicans were  reduced  to  two  groups;  of   these  one,  represented  by   the National,  limited  itself  to   preferring  a  republic  without  any   idea of   overturning  the   monarchy.  The  other,   having   but   one   deputy, Ledru-Rollin,  and  an  organ   but   little  read,   the   Reform,  kept   up the   tradition  of   revolutionary  riots,   and   demanded  universal  suffrage as   a   means  of   social   reform.  But   it   had   no  other   force   than a   few   small  secret  societies,  which  were  not  skilful  in   making  a political  fight.   According  to   La   Hodde,  the   Saismis  had  only 600   members,  the  Communists  and  Dissenters  500,  and  the Icariens  400.

The  Revolution  began   by   a   coalition  of   all   malcontents  against the   Guizot  ministry;  there  followed  a  series  of   revolutions  in quick   succession,  with  a   result  anticipated  by   no  one.

The  agitation  first   showed  itself  in   1847,   in   the   form  of   a   cam  paign   of   banquets  demanding  reform - that  is   to   say,  electoral reform.  The  Dynastic  Left,   which  had  organized  the   campaign, demanded  only   a  partial  reform,  the   lowering  of   the   taxpaying 155

qualification  and  the  addition  of   other  qualifications.  Their main  object   was  to   excite  prejudice  in   order  to   overthrow  the Guizot  ministry.  These  banquets  were  simply  demonstrations made  by   the   Liberal  and  Royalist  middle  class.  Toasts  were drunk  to  the   King   and  to   the   reform.  The  Republicans  interested themselves  in   the   movement;  at   the   Chateau-Rouge,  in Paris,   they   drank  to   "   the   bettering  of   the   lot   of   the   labouring classes  "   (July   9),   and   at   several  banquets  in   the   country  the   royal toast  was  suppressed.  The  government  replied  with  a  phrase  in the   speech   from  the   throne  against   agitation  "   fomented  by   hostile and   blind   passions   "   (December  28).   The  King   declared  that he   would  never  yield,   and   the   Chamber  passed   an  expression  of the   same  sentiments  (February  12,   1848).

The  government  forbade  the   banquet  of   the   I2th  arrondissement.  This  was  the  cause  of   the  Revolution.  The  opposition deputies   protested  against   the   prohibition  and   promised  to attend  the   banquet;  the   banquet  committee  arranged  to   have  the national  guard   and   the   students  meet  the   deputies  at   the   Madeleine and   escort  them   to   the   banquet   hall   (February  22).   The government  forbade  the  gathering  and  the  procession  in   the streets  (February  21).   The  deputies,  with  many  protestations, gave  up   the   demonstration,  and   the   Republicans,  meeting  at   the Reform  office,   decided  to   remain  away   from  the   banquet  that   the government  might   not   have  an  excuse  for   crushing  them.

The  demonstration  was,   however,  carried  out  as  announced, even  without  the   leaders.  An   enormous  crowd  of   workingmen and  students  met  in   the   morning  at   the   Place  de   la   Concorde, shouting  "   Hurrah  for   reform !   "  The  Marseillaise  was  heard ; all   day   long   there  were  riots   which  the   police   subdued  without serious  violence;  gunshops  were  plundered;  in   the   evening,  at   the Tuileries,  there  was  a   bonfire  of   chairs.  The  leaders  of   the secret  societies,  who  had   joined   the   mob  to   watch  the   results,  ' declared  revolution  impossible  (February  22).

The  revolution  set   in   the   next   day,   lasting   two   days,   February 23   and   24.   The  first  day's   outbreak  was  a  riot   by   the   reform party  against   Guizot;  the   second  was  a   revolt  of   the   Republican parties  against  the  monarchy.  On  the  morning  of   the  23d the  fight   began   as  usual,  with  the   barricading  of   the  industrial quarters  of   the   east   (Saint-Martin  and   Saint-Denis).  The workingmen  armed  themselves  as  usual,  with  the   muskets  belonging to   the   national  guard.   The   government  had   the   call   to   arms  I sounded,  and   the   national  guard   assembled  to   march  against   the   !

rioters.  But   the   national  guards   of   Paris  hated  Guizot;  many  of thiem  ran  through  the  streets  shouting  "   Hurrah  for   reform! Down  with  Guizot!"  The  insurrection  spread  to  the  western part   of   the   city.   Louis  Philippe,  who  always   regarded  the   national guard   as   the   representative  of   public   opinion,   suddenly   lost courage.  He  agreed  to   dismiss  Guizot  and  recall  Mole.  .The reform  party   had   conquered.  The  revolution  seemed  at   an  end; there  were  illuminations  in   the   evening.  Then  the   Republicans began   their  work,   wishing  to   profit   by   the   excitement  of   the   insurgents still   under  arms,  and   by   the   barricades,  which  were  still in   position.  In   the   evening   of   the   23d,   a   band,   leaving   the   eastern quarters,  and   re-enforced  by   a   group  who   were  celebrating  in front  of   the   National  office,   marched  through   the   boulevard,  calling for   torches.  On   the   Boulevard  of   the   Capuchins,  before  the ministry  of   foreign   affairs,  where  Guizot  lived,   they   attacked  the soldiers  who  were  on  guard;  the  soldiers  fired  on  the   crowd. This  was  the   famous  massacre  which  incited  the   Republicans  to a   decisive  move.  A   cart,   loaded  with  the   victims'  bodies,  passed along   the   boulevard.  The  bystanders  spread  the   news  around Paris;   the   people   got   the   impression  that   the   government  had deceived  the   people   in   order  to   have  them  massacred  by   the soldiers. ern

During  the   night   of   the   23d   all   the,   eastern  quarters  were   firmly barricaded.  The  24th   was  the  Republicans'  day.   Even  they had,   till   then,   cried   nothing   but   "   Long   live   reform!  "   On   the 24th   they   cried  "   Long   live   the   Republic!  "   The   drama  of   the day   was   divided  into   four   acts :

First.  Louis  Philippe,  having  been  unable  to   form  a   Mole ministry,  had   during   the   night   made  up   his   mind  to   call   upon   the leaders  of   the   opposition,  Thiers  of   the   Left   Centre  and   Odillon Barrot  of   the   Dynastic  Left.  In   the   morning  the   Thiers  ministry was   formed.  To   Bugeaud  was  given   the   command  of   the   army and   the   national  guard   of   Paris.  Bugeaud  sent   his   troops  to   attack the   insurgents  in   their   quarters;   but   the   soldiers,  exhausted and   demoralized,  halted  before  the   crowd  on   the   boulevard.  The government  gave  up   the   attack  and   recalled  the   troops  to   defend the   Tuileries.  They   then  tried  to   calm  the   insurgents  by   sending Barrot   to   announce  the   concessions  wrested  from  the   King: orders  given   to   cease  hostilities,  the   Chamber  to   be   dissolved, Lamoriciere  appointed  commander-in-chief  of   the   national  guard, and   a   Thiers-Barrot  ministry  to   be   announced.  The  insurgents, already   masters  of   the   eastern  quarters,  refused  to   receive  the

## I58        THE  REPUBLIC  AND    THE  DEMOCRATIC  EMPIRE.

King's  messengers.  The  editors  of   the   Reform  posted   placards with  the   words  "   Louis  Philippe  massacres  us  as   Charles  X.   did: let   him   follow  Charles  X."

Second.  About  ten  o'clock  the   insurgents  took  the   offensive; they   seized  the   Palais  Royal   and   attacked  the   soldiers  stationed opposite,  at   the   Chateau  d'Eau.  This  was  the   only   real  battle; it   checked  the   mob  which  was  marching  on   the   Tuileries.  During the   fight   Louis   Philippe,   on   horseback,  showed  himself  in   the court  of   the   Carrousel  to  encourage  the   national  guard.  He heard  the   shouts  of   "   Long   live   reform  !  "   saw  that   the   guards were  disaffected,  and  returned  to  the  Tuileries  discouraged. Then,   by   the   advice  of   his   son,   he   abdicated  in   favour  of   his   grandson, the   Count   of   Paris.  The   royal   family   left   the   Tuileries  immediately; the   Duchess  of   Orleans,  with  the   young   King,   took refuge   in   the   Chamber  of   Deputies.

Third.  At   half-past  four  the   mob  entered  the   Tuileries  without resistance  and   destroyed  the   throne.  In   the   Chamber,  the deputies,  meeting  once  more,  received  the   Duchess  and   her   son. They   proclaimed  the   Count  of   Paris  King, his   mother  regent,  then adjourned  the   meeting.  The  mob,   however,  invaded  the   Chamber, crying   "Down  with  royalty!"  The  Republican  members remained  in   session  and   resolved  in   the   midst  of   tumult  to   appoint a   provisional  government  made  up   of   deputies.  The  crowd  acclaimed a   list   drawn  up   by   the   National.  While  the   Republicans in   Parliament  were  thus  carrying  on  the   revolution  at   the   PalaisBourbon  in   'the   west  of   Paris,   the   Democratic  Republicans  were at   work  in   the   east  at   the   Hotel  de   Ville.  The   heads  of   the   secret societies,  joining   the   editors  of   the   Reform  at   their   office,   had   discussed the   National's  list,   and   added  three   names  of   their   own Flocon,  L.   Blanc,  and   a   leader  in   the   Saisons  society,  the   mechanic Albert.  They   also   made  a   different  assignment  of   the prefecture  of  police  (Caussidiere)  and  the  postmastership (Arago).  They   had  then  taken  possession  of   the   Hotel  de   Ville, where  they   proclaimed  the   republic.

Fourth.  As   in   1830,   there  were  now  two  governments  in   Paris;   ' as   in   1830,   the   government  proclaimed  at   the   Palais-Bourbon marched  through  the  streets  held  by   the   rebels  to  occupy  the Hotel  de   Ville.  There  the   new  government  installed  itself  and divided  the   ministerial  posts   between  its   members.  But   it   was necessary  to   do   something  for   the   men  proposed  by   the   Reform. As   there  were  no  more  portfolios  to   give   them,  they   were  appointed secretaries  of   the   provisional   government,  and   the   govern-

II

rnent  remained  at   the   Hotel  de   Ville.  The   next   day   they   decreed that  "   The  Republic  is   the   government  of   France,"  and,   on March  5,   promised  to   convoke  an  assembly  elected  by   universal suffrage  to   draw  up   a   constitution.  As   in   1830,   the   revolution made  in   Paris  was  passively  accepted  by   the   rest  of   the   nation.

J.   Simon  thus  sums  up   the   revolution  :   "   The  agitation,  set on   foot   by   certain  Liberals,  resulted  in   the   republic  which  they dreaded,  and  at   the   last   moment  universal  suffrage,  set  on   foot by   certain  Republicans,  resulted  in   promoting  the   cause  of   socialism, which   they   abhorred."

Struggles  in   the   Provisional  Government. - The   provisional  government was   formed   by   two  coalitions:  the   parliamentary  Republicans of   the   National's  list   (Arago,   Cremieux,  Marie,   GamierPages,  Lamartine),  and  the  democratic  Republicans  of   the Reform 's   list   (Flocon,  Marrast,  L.   Blanc,  Albert);  Ledru-Rollin was  named  in   both  lists.  The   two  parties   had   united  to   establish a   republic;  but   their   objects   were  different.  The   National  party wished  simply  a  political  revolution  to   establish  the   democratic republic,  retaining  the  tricolour  flag.   The  Reform  party   demanded a   social  revolution  to   better  the   condition  of   the   working classes  without  regard   to   the   rest  of   the   nation;  this   was   known as   the   democratic  and   social  republic,  and   adopted  the   red   flag.

The  contest  between  these  two  parties   began   at   once  and   lasted until  the   end.  The  democratic  Republicans  seemed  to   have  the upper   hand,   for   the   best-known  members  and   ministers  belonged to   them.  But  the   social  Republicans  held  the   posts  of   action, through  Caussidiere,  prefect  of   police,  and   Ledru-Rollin,  minister of   the   interior;  and   above  all   they   held   the   government  at the   Hotel  de   Ville  in   subjection  to   the   eastern  quarters.  It was  therefore  the   Socialists  who  had   the   advantage  at   first   and controlled  the   government.

The  workingmen,  armed  by   the   Revolution,  had   retained  their weapons;  having  no   leaders,  they   organized  themselves  by   two processes:  ist,   The   government  decreed  that  all   citizens  should join   the   national  guard.  The  workingmen  entered  in   legions. The   number  of   national  guards   in   Paris  rose   from  56,000   at   the beginning  of   February  to   190,000  at   the   middle  of   March.  2d, Political  societies  being   no&gt;   longer  forbidden,  workingmen's clubs   were   formed.  The   most  active  of   these,   the   Rights   of   Man, was  managed  by   the   leaders  of   the   secret  societies,  Sobrier  and Blanqui,   the   former  president  of   the   Seasons.  In   these  clubs  old Communists  sowed  the   seed  for   social  revolution.  The  work-

## 160       THE  REPUBLIC  AND    THE  DEMOCRATIC  EMPIRE.

ingmen,  being   without  precise   doctrine,  but   Socialists  by   instinct, became  an  army  at   the   service  of   the   party   which  talked  of   improving their   lot.   The   Socialist  leaders,   by   means  of   clubs,   gave a   rallying   cry   to   the   labourers,  gathered  them  in   armed  bands, and   led   them  to   the   Hotel  de   Ville   to   present  their   demands  to   the provisional  government.  There  the  socialist  group  compelled their  colleagues  to   yield.   This  plan   was  successfully  followed three  times:

First.  On   the   25th   of   February  an  armed  troop  entered  the hall  and  demanded  the  Rights  of   Labour  (a   formula  adopted by   the   Socialists).  L.   Blanc  drew  up   the   decree:  "   The   government of   the   French  Republic  undertakes  to   guarantee  the   existence of   the   workingman  by   labour  and   to   provide  labour  for   all citizens."  The  next  day   they   decreed  the   immediate  establishment of   "   national  workshops."  This  was  the   expression  which Louis  Blanc  had  made  so  popular.  A   mob  wished  to   hoist  the red   flag   at   the   Hotel  de   Ville,   as   the   symbol   of   the   social  republic, but   Lamartine  induced  it   to   keep   the   tricolour.

Second.  On   the   28th  of   February  a   crowd  arrived  with  flags bearing  the   words  "   Organization  of   Labour  "   (an   old   Saint-Simonian  formula  adopted  by   Louis  Blanc),  and  demanded  the creation  of   a   "   Progress   ministry."  Blanc  supported  the   demand, but   his   colleagues  refused  to   join   him,   so   he   had   to   content  himself with   securing   the   creation  of   the   "   government  committee  on the   labouring  classes,  with  the   express  mission  of   looking  after their  interests."  Blanc  and   Albert  were  appointed  members  of this   committee  and   went  to   establish  themselves  at   the   Luxembourg. There   they   called  together  delegates  of   workingmen from  the   different  trades  to   arrange  their  demands.  The  delegates demanded  the   reforms  which  interested  them  most  closely: the   reduction  of   the   hours  of   labour,   and   the   abolition  of   payment in   kind  (truck   system).  Their  demands  were  immediately  converted into   decrees.  The   working   day   was  reduced  from  u   to 10   hours  in   Paris,   and   from  12   to   n   hours  in   the   country.  The preamble  announced  that  "   prolonged  manual  labour  not  only ruins  the   labourer's  health,  but   also,   by   preventing  the   cultivation of   his   mind,   detracts  from  the   dignity   of   man."  The   government, however,   could   not   get   its   decree  applied;   employers took  no  notice  of   it.   The  Luxembourg  committee  proposed several  practical  measures  (social   workshops,  arbitration  between employers  and  labourers,  discount  offices  for   small  business),  but they   possessed  neither  money  nor  means  of   action.  They   could

&gt;nly   hold   conferences  to   which  they   invited  the   economists,  and nganize  a  committee  of   delegates  from  the   labouring  classes, r   lis,   by   keeping  Blanc  and  Albert  away   from  the   Hotel  de   Ville, veakened  the   Socialist  party   in   the   government.

Third.  The  government  having  suppressed  the  picked  comjanies  in   the   national  guard   (light   infantry   and   grenadiers,  men rom  the   middle  classes),  the   guardsmen  of   those  companies  made Before  the  Hotel  de   Ville  the  "   demonstration  of   bearskin :aps   "   (they   insisted  on  preserving  their  original  uniform).  '   The abouring  classes  believed  the   government  to   be   threatened  by ;he   middle  class.  They   assembled  at   the   Champ  de   Mars  and narched  en  masse  to   the   Hotel  de   Ville,   where  they   presented  their demands.  This  time  they   had  a  political  favour  to  ask.  The provisional  government  had  just   summoned  the   voters  all   over France  to   meet  in   their  precincts  on  the   9th   of   April   and   elect the   assembly  which  should  succeed  to   the   power.  The   Socialist party   wished  to   have  more  time  in   order  to   convert  the   electors to   its   views.  The  demonstration  of   March  17   demanded  the postponement  of   the   elections,  and   the   government  consented  to postpone  them  until  April   23.

But   the   social  Republicans,  who   had   had   the   advantage  of   conTolling   the   government  at   will,   were  after  all   only   a   small  milority.      All    France  opposed   them  and   half  of    Paris.     Their Opponents,  feeling   themselves  in   the   majority,  once  more  assumed :ontrol.     In   opposition  to   the   working-class  guards   they   set   up guards   of   their   own   from  the   middle  class,   and   the   garde   mobile, jormed   of   young  volunteers  receiving  pay.      The  26th  of   April vas  the   decisive  day.      The   workingmen  convoked  by   the   clubs jind   the   Luxembourg  delegation  marched  from  the   Champ  de tfars   to   the   Hotel  de   Ville   in   order  to   present  a   petition   for   the abolition  of   the   exploitation  of   one  man  by   another,  and   for   the rganization  of   labour  by   association."     But   Ledru-Rollin,  until ow  hovering  between  the   two   parties,   decided   against   the ialists.     He   sounded  the   call   to   arms.    The   national  guard me  armed  before  the   Hotel  de   Ville  and  received  the   workigmen  with  cries  of   "   Down  with   the   Communists  ! "     The   mob ;tired,   having   obtained  no  satisfaction.

The   social  Republicans  at   once  lost   all   influence  with   the   gov·nment.  All   that   they   had   effected  was  represented  by   promises hich   could  not   be   fulfilled,  and   by   two   institutions  which  the 'Vernment  made  useless:  the   Luxembourg  committee  and  the tional  workshops.  The  committee  had  never  had  any  real

power,  all   its   practical  work  consisting  in   the   creation  of   a   permanent committee  of   delegates  at   the   Luxembourg,  which thereby  became  a  centre  for   the   management  of   workingmen's agitations.  The  national  workshops  were  organized  by   the   minister of   commerce,  Marie,  Blanc's  opponent.  The  Revolution  of '48   had   produced  a   crisis  and   put   a   stop   to   business  and   manufacture. Hundreds  of   labourers  from  all   trades  found  themselves without  work.  The   government  undertook  to  employ them;  but   instead  of   organizing  them  in   real  workshops  where each  could  work  at   his   own  trade,   they   employed  them  all   indiscriminately at   building  fortifications  with  a  uniform  pay  of   two francs  a   day.   Their  number  increased  from  6000  in   March  to 100,000  in   May.   They   were  then  reduced  to   two   day's   work  in the   week,   with   half   wages,  or  one   franc  daily,   for   the   other  days. And,   having   completed  the   fortifications,  there  was  no  more  work for   them   to   do.   The   Champ   de   Mars,   where  they   were  supposed to   work,  became  a   hotbed  of   Socialist  agitation.  More  than 7,000,000  francs  were  distributed  to   labouring  men  under  this   disguised form   of   poor  relief. selves

The  provisional  government  did   away  with  several  unpopulai taxes:  the   salt   tax  and   the   stamp   duty   on  newspapers;  also   th&lt; octroi-dues  at   the   gates   of   Paris.  But   having   no  more  money   ir the   treasury  and  being   unable  to   negotiate  a   loan,   they   estab lished  an  extraordinary  tax  of   45   centimes  (i.   £.,   45   per   cent, added  to   the   direct  taxes.  This  burden  fell   not  only   on   the   mid die   class,   but   on  the   peasants,  and   made  them  hate  the   Re public.

The  Government  of   the   Constituent  Assembly. - The  Assembl was  elected  by   general  ticket,  in   each  department,  by   universs suffrage,  a   plurality  sufficing  to   elect.  It   was  composed  of   90 representatives,  receiving  25   francs  a   day   for   their  services.  I intrusted  the   government  to   an  executive  committee  of   5   metr bers,   which  was  to   appoint   the   ministers.  This  was  a   democratij assembly,  very   different  from  the   chamber  of   the   property  hole ers  under  Louis  Philippe.  The  majority  approved  the   policy   (I the  middle-class  wing   of   the  provisional  government.  The1 wanted  a   democratic  republic  without  a  social  revolution.  Tl:; Socialist  party   had  few  representatives  in   this  assembly.  . strong  minority,  elected  under  the   influence  of   the   clergy   air landlords,  wished,  if   not  the   monarchy,  at   least  a   firm  polk1 against  revolution - the  policy  vaguely  termed  reaction.  Tl democratic  Republicans  then  assumed  control  and  kept   it,   struj

gling   against  the   two  extreme  parties,  the   Socialists  and  the reactionists.

The   Socialists,  dissatisfied  with   the   Assembly,  twice  attempted a   new  revolution  to   establish  a   social-reform  government.  They met  with   armed  resistance  and   the   struggle  ended  in   civil   war.

The  1 5th   of   May   witnessed  a  sudden  outbreak  by   the   clubs, the   former  "   party   of   action  "   (Blanqui,  Barbes),  and   the   foreign refugees.  Under  the   pretext  of   presenting  a  petition  in   favour of   Poland,  they   invaded  the   Assembly,  declared  it   dissolved,  and proclaimed  a  provisional  government  by   the  Socialist  leaders (Barbes,  Blanqui,  Blanc,  Albert,  Cabet,  Proudhon,  Raspail, Ledru-Rollin).  The  national  guard,  however,  succeeded  in   dicpersing   them.

The   "Days   of   June"   were  a   general   insurrection  brought  about by   an  understanding  between  the   workmen  in   the   national  workshops and   the   delegates   of   the   Luxembourg  committee.  The Assembly,  hostile  to   the   national  workshops,  had   at   first   decided to   send   back   the   workmen  to   their   own   departments.  Then  they decided  to   close  the   workshops,  inviting  the   workmen  either  to enroll  in   the   army  or   to   get   ready   to   go   into   the   country,  where they   would  still   be   employed  on  earthworks  (June   21).   The workmen  had  protested  against  this  in   advance.  "   It   is   not  our wish   to   be   out   of   work,   but   we  cannot  get   profitable  employment in   our  own  trades.  What  will   become  of   the   1 10,000  workers  in the   national  workshops?"  (June   18).   A   delegation  went  in   search of   Marie  to   present  their  grievances.  He   replied  that  unless they   left   Paris  freely   they   would  be   driven  out   by   force.  The workmen  were  armed,  and  controlled  the  east  of   Paris.  They I barricaded  themselves  in   their  quarters.  They   demanded  the dissolution  of   the   Assembly  and   the   re-establishment  of   the   workshops.

The   Assembly  charged  General  Cavaignac  to   reduce  the   rebellious districts,   and   invested  him   with   dictatorial  power.  The truggle   that   followed  was  the   bloodiest  street  battle  that   had   ever been   seen   in   France,  On   one  side   all   the   working  population  of the   eastern  quarters  of   Old   Paris;   on   the   other  the   national  guard of   the   other  quarters  of   the   city,   the   garde   mobile,   the   garrison (20,000  men),   and   later  the   national  guards   of   the   surrounding country, - the   suburban  arrondissements  of   the   present   day,  - and finally   those   of   the   neighbouring  cities,   all   eager   to   exterminate the   Socialists.  The  insurgents  fought   without  leaders,  but   with desperation.  Their  centre  of   resistance  was  the   Faubourg  Saint-

## 1  64        THE  REPUBLIC  AND    THE  DEMOCRATIC  EMPIRE.

Antoine,  which  held  out  three  days   (June   24-26).  The   prisoners were  shot  summarily  or   tried  and   transported.  The   government suppressed  32   Socialist  newspapers.  There  now  existed  no longer  an  organized  Socialist  party.  Only   some  of   the   leaders, national  representatives,  Proudhon,  Considerant,  Pierre  Leroux, made  isolated  attempts  to   expound  their  views  in   the   Assembly, where  they   were  received  with  laughter  or  shouts  of   indignation.

Cavaignac  retained  the   executive  power  and  governed  in   harmony with   the   Assembly  and   in   sympathy  with  the   democratic republic.

The  Constituent  Assembly  now  began  the   work  for   which  it had  been  elected.  It   drew  up   the   constitution  of   1848.   This document  expressed  the   political  creed  of   the   conservative  democratic party   which   formed  the   majority.

First  they   passed   a   declaration  of   principles,  according  to   the tradition  of   the   Revolution.  "   In   the   presence  of   God  and   in the   name  of   the   people  .   .  .   France  is   constituted  a   Republic. The  French  Republic  is   democratic.  Its   principles  are   Liberty, Equality,  Fraternity;  its   foundations,  the   family,   rights   of   property, public   order."  The   declaration  not  only   recognised  all   individual liberties  and   abolished  slavery,   the   censorship,  and   the death  penalty  for   political  offences,  but   also  promised  social  reforms, free   primary   education,  professional  education,  equality  of relations  between  employer  and  labourer,  provident  institutions, etc.  The  first   plan,   drawn  up   on   June   20,   also   proposed  to   "   recognise the   right   of   every  citizen  to   labour  and   to   public   assistance." But   the   plan   finally   drawn  up   in   August   suppressed  this, substituting  a   non-committal  phrase:  "The  Republic  .  .   .   must, with  fraternal  aid,   assure  the   existence  of   needy   citizens  either  by procuring  them  work  within  the   limits  of   their  capabilities  or   by assisting  those  who  are  unable  to   work."  This  marked  the   victory of   the   democratic  over  the   social  republic;  individual  rights   were proclaimed  and  social  reforms  announced,  but   they   were  not   formulated as   a   right. ance.

The  government  was  organized  in   accordance  with  two  theoretical principles:   "All   public   powers  emanate  from  the   people. .   .   .   The  separation  of   powers   is   the   first   condition  of   a   free   government." This   theory   meant  that   there   were  two   powers,   both delegated  by   the   French  nation :   the   legislative  power  to   a   single assembly  of   750   members  elected  by   universal  suffrage;  the   executive to   a   citizen   elected  as   President  of   the   Republic   for   four   years (probably  in   imitation  of   the   United  States),  with  the   right   of

choosing  his   ministers.  They   did   not  want  two  Chambers,  because a   second  'house  seemed  an  aristocratic  institution;  they   restricted themselves  to   the   creation  of   a   Council  of   State,   elected by   the   Assembly  to   prepare  bills   for   the   Assembly.

This  was  the   American  mechanism  transported  from  a   federal government,  without  an  army  and  without  a   functionary  class, ir.to   a   centralized  government,  provided  with  an   irresistible  army and   a   body   of   office-holders  accustomed  to   ruling.      All   the   practical force   was  embodied  in   the   President.     The   fate   of   the   Rei   public   therefore  hung   on   the   question:  How  should  the   President be   chosen?  By   the   Assembly?  That  would  mean  Cavaignac,  who controlled  the   republican  party.      By   the   people?    Whom  that j would  mean,  no  one   knew.     Lamartine  knew  that  the   Assembly would  not  elect  'him,   so   he   advised  popular  election:  "   Let   God j and   the   nation  speak.      Something  must  be   left   to   Providence." I The  Assembly,  by   a  vote  of   602   against  211,  agreed   upon   this ! plan.      They   then   began   to   fear   Louis  Napoleon,  who  had   just i been  chosen  to   represent  5 different  departments ;   someone  proI posed   to   disqualify  members  of   former  reigning  families.    The i Assembly  refused  because  "   a   law   against   one  man  is   unworthy of   a   great   Assembly."

.The   election  of   the   President  by   universal  suffrage   (December 10,   1848)   decided  the   possession  of   power.     The   two  republican 'parties,   pitted   against   each   other  since  the   February  Revolution, ihadeach  its   own  candidate, the   Socialists  Ledru-Rollin,  the   Demojcrats   Cavaignac.     A   Bonapartist  party,  newly   formed,  nominated j Louis  Napoleon,  head  of   the   Napoleonic  family,   who  affected  to pose  as  a   citizen,   not   as   a   pretender.    The   former  royalists   flocked to   his   standard.    The   peasants  had   had   no  political  education; they   knew  but   one  name,  that  of   the   Emperor  Napoleon;  they voted  for   that   name.     Louis  Napoleon  received  5,400,000  votes (Cavaignac  1,400,000,  Ledru-Rollin  370,000)  and   took  possession of   the   executive  power - swearing  to   "   remain  faithful  to   the democratic  Republic  and  to   defend  the   Constitution";  he   chose a   parliamentary  ministry  formed  chiefly  of   Liberal   Orleanists and   Catholics.     The   Constituent  Assembly  continued  in   session hough   in   discord  with  the   President.     It   refused  to   pass  a   law against  political  meetings  and  censured  the  President's  order ending  the   French  troops  to   attack  the   Roman  Republic  in   deence  of   the   Pope.      In   the   country  the   new  prefects  appointed -y   the   ministers  made  trouble  by   doing   away  with   the   liberty   trees and   the   Phrygian  caps.

## 1  66        THE  REPUBLIC  AND    THE  DEMOCRATIC  EMPIRE.

The  Government  of   the   Monarchical  Parties'  (1849-51). - In   the Legislative  Assembly  elected  in   May,  1849,   the  position  of parties   was  reversed.  Of   the   more  than  750   members,  500   were monarchists,  elected  through  the   influence  of   the   clergy   and   the royalist   middle  class.  Their  election  had   been  prepared  by   the committee  of   the   Rue  de   Poiters,  the   league   of   the   three  parties, Orleanist  (Thiers),  Legitimist  (Berry er),   Catholic  (Montalembert). Of   the   250   Republicans,  only   70   represented  the   party   which  had been  in   majority  in   the   Constituent  Assembly.  The  rest  formed the   party  of   the   Mountain  (ultra-revolutionists),  called  by   their adversaries  the   Reds.  There  was  a  coalition  of   all   the   Republicans, formed  to   save  the   Republic  by   making   an  appeal   to democratic  sentiments.  It   had  gathered  together  the   remains of   the   socialist  parties,   which  had   been   disorganized  by   the   loss   of their  imprisoned  and  banished  leaders  (Blanqui,  Barbes,  Blanc). This  coalition  had   been  organized  for   the   parliamentary  elections, under  the   direction  of   election  committees,  the   Friends  of   the   Constitution, the   Republican  Union  (of   which  Jean   Mace  was  secretary), and   the   group  of   deputies   known  as   the   Mountain  in   the Constituent  Assembly.  The  programs  of   these  committees  promised a   number  of   social  reforms  ; that   of   the   Mountain,  written  by Felix  Pyat,   recognised  "   the   right   of   property  by   the   right   of labour,"  and  demanded  "   a  progressive  and  proportional  tax  on net  income,  and  government  control  of   railroads,  mines,  and canals,  and  insurance."  The  large   cities  and  the  eastern  and central  departments  elected  members  of   the   Mountain  party.

The  majority,  in   harmony  with  the   President  and   his   ministers, laboured  to   crush  the   Republican  party,   by   taking   away  all   their means  of   agitation  and   .action - their  newspapers  and  political societies,  lay   schools,  and   universal  suffrage.

The  struggle  began   over  the   expedition  to   Rome.  The   Mountain demanded  the   impeachment  of   the   ministers  for   having   violated the   constitution  *   in   making   war  on   the   Roman  Republic against  the   Assembly's  wish.  The  majority  rejected  the   measure. The   democratic  committees  issued  an  appeal   to   the   national guards   to   gather   for   a   demonstration.  This  resulted  in   the   Artsand-Trades'  outbreak.  The  Assembly  suspended  the  party's newspapers  and  ordered  the   arrest  of   33   representatives.  LedruRollin  fled   to   London  (June   13,   1849).   Then  a  new  press   law

*   Article  5   :   "   The  French  Republic  respects  foreign  nations  .  .  .   and will   never  employ  her   forces  against  the   liberty   of   any   people."

required  a   deposit   by   way  of   security  of   24,000   francs  and   gave the   government  the   right   to   forbid  the   sale   of   newspapers  (July, 1849).  A   bill   was  passed   forbidding  public   political  meetings. All   these  measures  were  directed  against   the   Republican  parties. After  having  crushed  the   Mountain  the   government  party   began to   break  up.   The  President  took  advantage  of   a   disagreement with   his   Orleanist  ministers  over  the   Roman  policy   to   rid himself  of   them  and  replace  them  with  personal  partisans.  In this   way  a   Napoleonic  party   began   slowly   to   detach  itself  from the   monarchists,  bidding  for   popularity  by   combating  "   the Reds."  Carlier,  perfect  of   police,  founded  a   Social  Leagne  in opposition  to   socialism  and   had   the   liberty   trees  cut   down. {san

Once  again,  in   1850,   all   the   monarchists  united  against  the Mountain.  Their  union  was  nicknamed  "   the   Roman  expedition at   home."  They   passed  two  laws - the  education  bill   (March, 1850)   and   the   electoral  law   of   May   31,   1850.

The  educational  bill   was  the   work  of   the   Catholic  party.   The Republican  government  in   1848   had  proposed  a  scheme  of   free and   compulsory  instruction,  but   the   Legislature  did   not  approve even  the  principle.  The  majority  distrusted  lay   teachers. The  minister  called  them  "   the  regimental  officers  of   the democratic  and  social  Republic";  Montalembert  dubbed  them "horrible  little  rhetoricians";  Lamartine  said  they   were  "   fomenters  of   stupid  anti-social  doctrines."  The  law  of   1850 made  teachers  subject  to   dismissal  without  right   of   appeal and  imposed  on  them  the  obligation  of   teaching  the  catechism. This   law,   passed   in   the   name  of   the   principle   of   freedom in   education,  abolished  the   monopoly  of   the   University  and   gave to   individuals  the   right   to   open   free   schools,  either  secondary  or primary.  The  "   congregations,"  almost  the   only   ones  to   profit by   this   liberty,   founded  all   over   France  colleges   and   ecclesiastical primary  schools.  The  municipalities  received  the   right   to   choose for   their   primary   schools  between  laymen  and   members  of   the congregation ;   almost  all   the   schools  for   girls   were  given   into   the hands  of   the   religious  orders.

At   the   supplementary  elections  of   1850   almost  all   those  elected belonged  to   the   Mountain.  The  majority  becamed  alarmed  and decided  to   "   purify   universal  suffrage."  The   bill   of   May   31   made it   necessary  for   each   elector  to   have   three  years'   residence,  verified by   the   taxing   lists   of   the   department.  It   took   away   the   right of   voting   from   persons  condemned  for   rebellion,  outrage  against authority,  membership  in   a   secret  society   or  a   club.  The   object

was  to   shut   out   from  political   life   the   workingmen  and   the   democratic general   staff;   but   the   law   also   affected  many  of   the   peasants and  diminished  the   number  of   electors  by   three  millions.

The  Conflict  Between  the   President  and  the  Assembly. - The monarchist  parties   and   the   President,  after   having   worked  in   concert against   the   Republicans,  broke  apart.   The   President  was increasing  his   personal  power;  he   had  taken  his   personal  supporters for   ministers  ; he   laboured  to   attach  to   himself  the   higher officers  of   the   army  and   the   civil   functionaries.  He   held   military reviews  and  made  excursions  into  the   country,  giving   occasion for   cries   of   "   Long   live   Napoleon!  "   sometimes  even   "   Long   live the   Emperor!  "   His  adversaries  accused  the   generals  and  the ministers  of   organizing  these  demonstrations.  In   the   Assembly the   undecided  Conservatives  rallied  around  him,   and   began   to form  a   Bonapartist  party.  The  Orleanist  and   Legitimist  parties were  alarmed  and   entered  into   a   struggle  against   the   President.

The  conflict  began  over  the  review  at   Satory  (October  10, 1850).  The  cavalry  cried  "Long  live  Napoleon!"  the   infantry made  no  cry.   The  minister  of   war  cashiered  the   general   who   had ordered  the   silence.  The  permanent  committee  in   session  during the   absence  of   the   Assembly  protested  against   the   dismissal.  The President  put   an  end   to   the   conflict  by   a   conciliatory  message.

Then  practical  questions  arose, - the   disposition  of   the   armed force  and   the   eligibility  of   the   President  to   be   elected  for   a   second term, - questions  which  in   one   form  or  another  filled  the   decisive year  1851.

First.  The  military  power  which  the   constitution  intrusted  to' the   President  and   to   his   minister  of   war,  was   in   practice,  shared between  them  and  the   commander-in-chief  of   the   army  and  of the   national  guard   of   Paris.  Changarnier  had  held  this  latter office  since  1848   with  the   entire  confidence  of   the   monarchist parties.  Changarnier  had  just   broken  with  the   President  by   taking the   part   of   the   cashiered  general.  The  President,  having failed  in   getting   the   Assembly  to   impeach  him,   dismissed  him (January  5,   1851).  The  Assembly  answered  with  a  vote  of   want of   confidence  in   the   ministry.  By   the   help   of   the   Republicans this   was  carried  by   417   votes  against   286.  The  Assembly  had now  broken  definitely  with  the   President,  but   the   former  majority was  dissolved.  The  Assembly  was  split   into  three  irreconcilable factions:  first,   the   President's  party;  secondly,  the   monarchist coalition  made  up   of   Legitimists,  Orleanists,  and   fusionists  (advocating a   fusion  between  the   two  royal   branches),  and,   thirdly,  the

Republican  party.  From  now  on  there  was  no  majority  save  by coalition  and   the   Assembly  could  pass  only   negative  measures. The  President,  pleading  the   lack  of   a   majority,  appointed  a   ministry without  a   policy.

Second.  The  ministry  demanded  an   increase  of   the   President's salary.  The  proposition  was  rejected  by   a  coalition  of   Republicans and   Legitimists  (396   against   294;   February,  1851).

Third.  The  Orleanists  demanded  the  abrogation  of   the   laws decreeing  exile  against  the   princes  of   the   Orleans  family.  The scheme  was  defeated  by   a   coalition  of   Napoleonists  and   Legitimists.

Fourth.  The  Napoleonic  party   demanded  the   revision  of   the constitution.  There  was  an  article  forbidding  re-election  of   the outgoing  President;  Napoleon  wanted  to   be   re-elected.  A   committee organized   an   agitation   to   get   petitions   signed ;   with  the   ^id of   the   government  officials  they   secured  over  a   million  signatures, and   of   85   general  councils  80   demanded  the   revision.  But   by   the Constitution  of   1848   a   revision  required  a   three-quarters  vote  of the   Assembly.  The  monarchist  coalition  voted  against  the   revision, and   the   measure  was   defeated  by   a   vote  of   446   against   278 (July   26).

Vacation  interrupted  the   struggle,  but   it   was  clearly   seen  that arms  would  be   employed  before  long.   The  President  had   said   at Dijon   (June   i)  :   "   Whatever  duties  the   nation  may   impose  upon me,   she   will   find   me  ready   to   carry  out   her   wishes."  The   Republicans had   organized  secret  societies,  especially  in   the   southeast and  in   a   part   of   the   centre,  which  seem  to   have  been  in   touch with   a   central  management  at   Paris  and   Lyons.*  Some  of   these societies  had   initiation  ceremonies  copied   from  the   old   societies the   oath   on  a   dagger),   democratic  emblems  (red   flag,   Phrygian cap,   spirit-level),  and   a   password;  they   were  in   communication with   foreign   revolutionists  and   refugees  in   London  and   Switzerand.  The  government  agents  accused  them  of   having  stores  of arms  and  lists  of   suspects;  also  of   preparing  to   crush  the   pre'ectnres  in   the   elections  of   1852   and   create  revolutionary  tribunals. The   President's  message  on  the  reopening  of   the

*This  organization,  which  has  still  been  little  investigated,  is   rendered rery   obscure  by   the   division  into   independent  and   even  unfriendly  groups, he   Blanquist  party   (Friends  of   Equality},  the   Central  Democratic  Comnittee  (Ledru-Rollin),  Louis  Blanc's  Socialist  party,  Karl  Marx's  Com' munis t   Alliance,  and  the  Union  of   the   Communes.

1 70        THE  REPUBLIC  AND    THE  DEMOCRATIC  EMPIRE.

Assembly  declared:   "A  vast   demagogic   conspiracy   is    being organized  in   France  and   all   over   Europe."

Fifth.  The  President  demanded  the   repeal   of   the   electoral  law of   1850   as   incompatible  with  universal  suffrage.  Urgency  was asked  for   the   repealing  bill,   but   was  refused;  and   the   scheme  was rejected  by   a   majority  of   six   votes.

Sixth.  St.-Arnaud,  the   minister  of   war,  ordered  the   removal from  all   the   barracks  of   all   the   placards  of   the   decree  of   1848, which  gave  the   President  of   the   Constituent  Assembly  of   that   year the   right   to   call   out  the   armed  forces.  The  monarchist  party, feeling   the   Assembly  menaced  by   the   executive  power,  presented the   "   proposition  of   the   questors  "   conferring  on   the   President  of the   Legislative  Assembly  the   right   to   demand  the   services  of   the armed  force  and   all   persons   in   authority.  The   Republicans,  however, feared   a   monarchist  coup   d'etat.  The   proposition  was   defeated (November  18)   by   a   coalition  of   Bonapartists  and   Republicans (408   to   300).

Establishment  of   Personal  Power  (1851-52). - The  President put   an  end   to   the   conflict  by   a   coup   d'etat  on   the   2d   of   December, 1851.   He   published  a   decree  declaring  the   Assembly  dissolved, universal  suffrage   re-established,  and   the   French  people convoked  in   their  primary  assemblies.  A   proclamation  to  the people   set   forth  the   motives  for   the   coup   d'etat   and   the   plan   for   a revision  of   the   constitution.  Theoretically  it   was   founded  upon the   sovereignty  of   the   people:   "   My   duty   is   to   maintain  the   Republic ...   by   invoking  the   judgment  of   the   only   sovereign  I recognise  in   France - the   people."  In   reality   this   was  the   revolt of   the   executive  power,  that   is   to   say,   of   the   armed  force   against the   theoretical  representatives  of   the   nation.  The   coup   d'etat  was prepared  by   the   ministers  and   the   generals  of   the   army  of   Paris. It   began   with   a   proclamation  to   the   soldiers.

The  Assembly  was  disorganized.  The  government  had  taken care  to   arrest  all   party   leaders  during   the   night   and   to   fill   the Legislative  hall   with  soldiers.  Nevertheless  217   representatives, almost  all   monarchists,  were  able  to  meet  at  the  town  hall (Mairie)  of   the   loth   arrondissement  of   Paris  and   constitute  themselves as   the   Assembly.  The  constitution  had  provided  against this  contingency:  If   the   President  dissolves  the   Assembly  he forfeits  his   position;  the   Assembly  takes  his   powers  and   the   High Court  meets  to   judge   him   (Article   68).   The   Assembly  therefore voted  the   expulsion  of   the   President  from  office,  and   named  a commandant  for   the   army.  The  members  were  arrested  and   im-

prisoned.  The  High   Court  met  at   the   Palace  and   began   preparations for   the   trial;   it   was   dispersed.

Resistance  to   the   coup   d'etat   was  slow   in   organizing;  it   was  the work  of   the   Republicans.  In   Paris  the   soldiers  marched  through the   streets  and   fired   upon   the   unarmed  crowd;  the   only   real   battle was   in   the   workingmen's  quarters  in   the   east  of   Paris  (Saint-Antoine,  Saint-Martin).  In   fifteen  or  more  departments  of   the southeast  and  the   centre  there  were  local  insurrections  of   Republicans, who   tried   to   take   possession   of   the   chief   towns.  These insurgents,  especially  in   the   southeast,  were  peasants  and   members of   secret  societies.  The   government  took  advantage  of   this to   represent  the   movement  as  a   jacquerie  or  a   communist  uprising and   to   pose   as   the   defender  of   society.  The   President  proclaimed martial  law   in   32   departments,  granted  himself  by   decree  (December 8)   the   right   to   exile   all   members  of   secret  societies,  and created  mixed  commissions  (a   general,  a   prefect,   and   an  attorney) with  power  to   judge   without  appeal.

According  to   a   document  discovered  in   the   Tuileries  in   1870, there  were  26,642   persons  arrested  and   only   6500   released;  5108 were  made  subject  to   police   supervision,  and  15,033  condemned (of   whom  9530  ,were  transported  to   Algeria,  239   to   Cayenne after  a   long   term  on  the   pontoons,  2804   confined  in   a   French city).   Eighty   representatives,  almost  all   Republicans,  were  banished. The   Republican  party,   deprived   of   its   leaders  and   its   most active  members,  remained  disorganized  and  hardly  recovered from  the   blow  until  the   return  of   these  convicts  and   exiles  in 1859.

The  President,  having   rid   himself  of   the   Assembly,  which  had held   the   legislative  power,  and   the   Republicans  who   were  preparing to   secure   it   again   in   the   elections  of   1852,   found  himself  absolute master  of   France.  He   organized  his   government  on  the model  adopted  by   Napoleon  I.,   the  Constitution  of   the   year VIII.,   which  had   "   once  already   brought  France  peace  and   pros- perity." The  President,  elected  for  ten  years,   had  all   the   executive power.  He  was  to   be   assisted  by   three  bodies :   a   "   Council  of State,"  appointed  by   him  to  prepare  bills  for  enactment;  a "   Legislative  Body,"  elected  byuniversal  suffrage,  to   discuss  and vote   bills   and   the   budget;   a   "   second  assembly  "   (soon   called  the Senate),   appointed  by   the   President  as   "   guardian  of   the   fundamental compact  and   of   public   liberties."  The  ministers  were chosen  by   the   President  and   dependent  upon   him  alone;  they

were  no   longer   responsible.  There  was  only   one  responsible  person, the   President,  but   he   was  not   responsible  to   any   organized body;   he   was  responsible  only   to   the   people.  Theoretically  this system  concentrated  all   the   powers  in   a   sovereign  nation,  practically in   the   chief   who   represented  it,   for   the   people   had   no  way to   express  their  will   but   by   plebiscite,  voting   "   yes   "   or   "   no." This  constitution,  however,  differed  from  that  of   Napoleon  I., in   that   it   admitted  a   Chamber  elected  directly  by   the   people. This  was  a   concession  to   representative  democratic  government in   a   regime   of   personal  government.  Universal  suffrage,  the creation  of   the   Revolution  of   '48,   is   preserved  and   even  made  the legal   foundation  of   the   constitution.

This  system,  proposed  on  the   2d   of   December,  was  voted  by plebiscite  - 7,481,000  voting   in   favour  and   647,002  against.  Of the   opposing  votes  39,000  were  cast   by   soldiers.  Then  the   system was  embodied  in   the   Constitution  of   1852.   This   defined  the President's  powers;  not  only   was   he   to   choose  all   public   officers, declare  war,  make  treaties,  and   declare  martial  law,   but   he   had the   sole   initiative  in   lawmaking,  the   Chamber  being   forbidden  to discuss  any   but   bills   laid   before  it   by   him : it   could  not  even  vote amendments  without  his   approval.  The  Senate,  composed  of   150 life   members,  was  to  expound  and  maintain  the  constitution. Laws  had   to   be   submitted  to   it   before  promulgation;  but   it   was not  a   mere  second  chamber  to   pass  or  reject   measures  adopted  by the   Legislative  Body.  It   was  the   guardian  of   the   constitution, and,   as  such,   had   the   right   to   correct  any   arbitrary  or   illegal   act brought  to   its   attention  by   the   government  or   by   petition  of citizens.  The  Legislative  Body   was  reduced  to  251   deputies; they   were  required  to   swear  fidelity   to   'the   President.

Napoleon  regarded  himself  as  continuing  his   uncle's  work,   but he   gave   his   own   interpretation's  to   the   policy   pursued  by   Napoleon I.   In   the   "   Napoleonic  Ideas  "   he   calls  Napoleon  the "   testamentary  executor  of   the   Revolution,"  who  had   "   hastened the   reign   of   Liberty."  He   shows  him  absorbed  by   the   desire  to establish  democracy  and   to   attain  peace   through  war.  Now  "   the nature  of   democracy  is   to  personify  itself  in   one  man."  Napoleon, like   his   uncle,   wished  to   embody   democracy  and   promised to   bring   peace.

He  had  kept   only   provisionally  the   title   of   President.     In   his' tour  through  the   country  in   1852   he   was  received  as  a   sovereign. He   himself  at   Bordeaux  announced  the   restoration  of   the   Empire by   saying:   "The  Empire  means  peace."    'The  Senate  chosen  by

him  passed   a   senatorial  decree  proclaiming  Napoleon  III.  Emperor of   the   French.  The  people  accepted  it   by   a   plebiscite  (December 10,   1852).   This   was  a   restoration  of   the   first   Empire. The  power  was  to   be   hereditary  in   the   imperial  family   (the   children of   King   Jerome) :   an   imperial  dynasty  was  established.

The  Autocratic  Empire  (1852-60). - During  the   first  years  of the   Empire  French  political  life   was  suspended.  There  were  still political  institutions,  a  chamber,  elections,  newspapers;  the   imperial government  had   had   the   art   to   make  their   power   illusory by   reducing  them  to   the   mockery  of   serving  only   as  an  ornamental mask   for   the   personal   absolutism  of   the   Emperor  and   his ministers.  This  art  consisted  in   measures  of   detail  combined  so as   to   paralyze   all   political   life.

The  Chamber  met  at   Paris  for   three  months  every  year,   to   pass laws  and   vote  the   budget.  They   could,  however,  neither  make their  own  rules,  nor  elect  their  president,  nor  propose  a   bill. Their  sessions  were  public,  but   their  debates  could  be   published only   in   the   form  of   an  official  analytic  report,  and   the   vote  of only   five   members  could  compel   a   secret  discussion.  There  was, therefore,  no  way   for   the   opposition  to   come  before  the   public. They   voted  the   budget,   but   in   the   lump,   the   appropriations  for   a whole  ministry  at   once,  and   the   government,  by   transfers,  could make  even  this   vote  amount  to   nothing.

All   male  citizens  could  vote.  The  constitution  rested  upon universal  suffrage,  and  the   qualification  was  made  even  simpler, by   substituting  the   commune  for   the   canton  as   the   voting   district (or   precinct)  and  single-member  districts  for   the   general ticket  by   departments.  The  government,  however,  controlled  the elections  in   several 'ways.  It   presented  in   each  district  an  official candidate  recommended  to   the   voters  by   white  paper  posters,  at the   expense  of   the   state.  It   made  all   public   officials  support   him actively.  The  theory   was  that   the   citizens  needed  the   guidance of   the   government.  The  opposition  candidate  had  the   disadvantage of   presenting  himself  under  his   private   name,  at   his   own expense,  and  as  an  adversary  of   the   established  power.  After 1858   he   was  obliged,  in   addition,  to   sign   a   declaration  of   fidelity to   the   Emperor  and  to   the   constitution.  All   election  meetings were  forbidden,  as  a   violation  of   the   freedom  of   the   voters;  even the   distribution  of   ballots  was  not  permitted,  the   Court  of   Cassation having   decided  that   a   ballot,   like   a   book,   must  be   subject to   the   law   forbidding  hawking  and   could  only   be   given   out  at   a fixed   place.  The  election  was  directed  by   the   mayor;  all   the

mayors  since  1852   had   been  appointed  by   the   government.  The voting   lasted  two   days;   in   the   country,   in   the   evening   of   the   first day,   the   mayor  carried  off   the   ballot  box   to   his   own   house;   supervision was   out   of   the   question.  In   places   where  the   peasants   had not  yet   grown  accustomed  to   come  and  vote,  the   mayor   improvised the   results   of   the   ballot.  The   electoral  districts  were  fixed, not   by   law,   but   by   a   simple   order   of   the   government,  made  every 5   years  without  any  rule.  They   laid   out  the   districts  in   the   way most  advantageous  to  the   official  candidates.  They   cut  up   the cities  into   fragments,  which  they   joined   to   rural  districts  in   order to   overcome  the   opposition  of   the   city   democrats  by   the   votes  of the   peasantry.

Political  journals  were  not  suppressed,  nor  even  as   in   1815   subjected to   a   censorship.  The  deposit  by   way  of   security  for   good behaviour,  although  doubled  since  1852   (50,000  francs  in   Paris), was  still   less   than   in   1819.   But   the   decree  of   1852   had   robbed the   press  of   all   guarantee  of   independence.  Previous  authorization for   new   journals   was  once  more  established,  and   such authorization  was  granted  only   on  condition  that   the   government should  name  the  editor-in-chief.  Press  offences  were  taken away   from  jury   courts  and   given   to   tribunals  of   summary  jurisdiction. On   the   second  condemnation  the   journal  was  suppressed. The   government  also   secured  the   right   to   suppress  any paper   in   the   name  of   public   security.  It   was  unlawful  to   report press  cases  or  sessions  of   the   Chambers,  or   to   publish   false   news - that   is   to   say,   news   displeasing  to   the   government.  The   famous system  of   warnings  was  established.  If   an  article  was  displeasing to   the   government,  the   paper  received  a   warning  from  the prefect;  on  a   second  offence,  the   paper  might   be   suspended.  The prefects  issued  these  warnings  at   will.  The  Corsican  Observer received  one   for   having   discussed  public   pastures :   "   this   attack may  excite  discontent  among  a  certain  class  of   citizens  " ;   the Lighthouse  of   the   Loire  for   the   following  sentence:  "The  Emperor has   made   a   speech   which,   according  to   the   Havas  agency, several  times  evoked  cries  of   'Long  live  the   Emperor!'"  the ground  of   warning  being   that  "   this   doubtful  expression  is   unsuitable in   the   presence  of   the   wild   enthusiasm  which  the   Emperor's words   excited.  .   ."   * peror's

*   The  censorship  of   theatres  permitted  nothing  with  the  slightest  political allusion,  even  of   the   most  indirect  nature.  An   opera  on   the   Fronde was  forbidden  as   "   impregnated  with  the   spirit   of   revolution,"  and   because of   the   introduction  of   riots  and   the   cry   "   To   arms  ! "   on   the   stage.   Musset

Even  individuals  were  watched  by   the   police,   and   a   political conversation  was  enough  to   brand  a  person  as  a  suspect  under this   administration,  which,  having  no  public  exposure  to   fear, made  arbitrary  disposal  of   the   liberty   of   all   its   subjects.  The   caprice of   an  agent  might   cause  the   arrest  and   detention  of   anyone who  seemed  to   him   dangerous.  The  comedian  Grassot  was  arrested for   having  been  overheard  to   say   in   a   cafe:  "   This   is   like SebastO'pol;  one  can't  take  anything."  A   woman  was  arrested at   Tours  for   having   said   that   the   grape   blight   was  coming   again; in   releasing  her   the   prefect   threatened  to   imprison  her   for   life   if she   spread   any   more  bad   news.

The  national  guard   had   not   been  abolished;  but   the   decree  of 1852   had  declared  the   national  guards  dissolved,  adding  that their  "   reorganization  would  depend  on  circumstances."  They were  not  reorganized.

The  University  remained,  but   subject   to   a   regime   calculated  to make  it   lose   its   liberal  tendencies.  The  instructors  must  take the   oath   of   fidelity   to   the   Emperor,  and   many  preferred  to   resign. The  professors  might   be   dismissed  at   any   time,   without  appeal. Education  tended  toward  confining  itself  to   the   ancient  languages and  the   sciences;  the   professorships  of   history   and   philosophy were  suppressed.  The  Fortoul  ministry  has  remained  famous (1851-56);  this   was  the   time  when  the   exercises  in   all   the   classes in   France  must  take   place   at   the   same  hour;   when  the   professors received  the   order  to   shave  their  mustaches  that   they   might   drop "   from  their  appearance  as  well  as   from  their  manners  the   last vestiges  of   anarchy."

The  government'  depended  on  the  army,  which  assured  its power;  on  the   commercial  middle  class,   satisfied  with  being   no longer   troubled  by   politics;   and   above  all   on   the   clergy, who   made the   country  electors  vote  for   the   official  candidates.  (The   most widely   circulated  newspaper  in   the   clerical  world,  the   Univers, after  having  supported  the  Republic,  had  gone  over  to   Napoleon.)

Under  this  system  political  life   had   ceased.  The   Republicans, deprived  of   their   chiefs  by   exile   or   transportation,  and   persecuted by   the   police,   had   no   longer   any   means  of   showing  their  opposition. They   had   not   even   deputies   until   1857,   and   from   1857   to could  not  produce  his   "   Lorenzaccio  "   because  "the  discussion  of   the   right to   assassinate  a   sovereign  whose  crime  cried  for   vengeance  "   was  "a   dangerous spectacle."

## 1  76        THE  REPUBLIC  AND    THE  DEMOCRATIC  EMPIRE.

1863   they   had  only   five,  - "   the   Five," - elected  by   Paris  and Lyons.  The  Legitimists  and  Orleanists  were  less  persecuted,  as the   government  hoped  to&gt;  win  them  over  individually;  but   the clergy,   by   joining   Napoleon,  had   taken  away  their  voters.  The opposition  was  scarcely  shown  except  in   the  salons  and  in newspapers  brought  in   from  foreign  countries  (England,  Belgium, and   Switzerland).  The   government  watched  the   frontier and  searched  travellers,  to   prevent  the   entry   of   books  and   papers hostile  to   the   Emperor.

The  leading  men  of   the   country  were  absorbed  in   business undertakings.  The  great  events  of   this  period  were  the   construction of   railroads,  the   creation  of   joint-stock  companies,  the foundation  o&gt;f   great   financial  establishments,  the   credit  fonder,  the credit  mobilier,  agricultural  societies,  the   World's  Exposition  of 1855,   the   transformation  of   Paris  undertaken  systematically  by Hausmann  (1854),  etc.  Napoleon  considered  great  public   works a   means  of   winning  over  the   industrial  classes  by   procuring  them work.  The  only   domestic  political  events  were  the   Republican plot   of   1853   and   three  attacks  on   the   Emperor.  The   most  important of   these  attacks  was  made  by   Orsini  in   1858.   It   was  a purely  Italian  plot,   but   the   government  used  it   against   the   Republicans. They   forced  the   Chamber  to  vote  the   General Security  Act.  This  law  gave  the   government  the   power  to   detain, exile,   or   transport  without  trial   any   person  previously  condemned for   political  offences;  and   to   imprison  or  exile  any   persons so   condemned  in   the   future.

Espinasse,  a  general  well  known  for   his   share  in   the   coup d'etat,   was  appointed  minister  of   the   interior  to   apply   this   law. He  sent  an  order  to   each  prefect   to   arrest  a  certain  number  of persons,  using   his   own  choice  in   the   selection.  According  to Blanchard  this  number  varied  from  20  to   41 ; it   was   "   proportioned to   the   general   spirit   of   the   department."  Each  prefect   interpreted the   order  in   his   own  way  - some  limiting  themselves to   men  condemned  at   the   time  of   the   Republic,  others  taking those  who  seemed  to   them  dangerous,  chiefly   workingmen,  lawyers, and   doctors.  The  object   was  simply   to   intimidate  the people.

Decline  of   the  Autocratic  Regime  (1860-66). - The  decisive events  of   Napoleon  III/s  reign   were  the   foreign   wars.  The   Emperor had   the   right   to   declare  war  without  consulting  the   Chamber. He   had   employed  this   right   to   pursue   his   personal  policy abroad,  but  his   wars  and  his   treaties  reacted  on   his   govern-

inent  at   home.  The  nation's  fate   hung   upon   the   Emperor's  foreign policy.

Up   to  1857   the   government  had  the   support  of   the   clergy against  the   Liberals.  The  Italian  war  alienated  the   clergy;  by setting   up   the   Kingdom  of   Italy   and   allowing  it   to   deprive   the Pope   of   the   greater  part   of   his   states,  the   Emperor  had   aroused Catholic  opposition.  To   offset  this  loss  Napoleon  tried  to   win over  the   Liberals.  He   began   by   the   general  amnesty  of   1859, permitting  the   return  of   all   the   exiles  and   convicts  of   1851.   The Republicans,  re-enforced  by   the   return  of   their  former  leaders,  so far   from  fulfilling  these  hopes,   found  themselves  once  more strong  enough  for   open  opposition.  To.   conciliate  the   parliamentary Liberals,   Napoleon  relaxed  his   legislative  system.  He gave   the   Chamber  the   right   to   draw  up   an  address  in   response to   the   speech   from  the   throne.  He   permitted  the   publication  of the   debates  in   full   in   the   official  organ,   the   Moniteur  (November, 1860).  The  ministerial  budget  was  divided  into  sections  on which  the   Chamber  voted  separately  (1861).  This  was  returning to   former  parliamentary  practices.  At   the   same  time  the   Emperor, without  consulting  the   Chamber,  which  he   knew  to   be dominated  by   protectionists,  concluded  with  England  the   commercial treaty   of   1860,   abolishing  prohibitions,  and   lowering  protective duties.  This   was   to   set   France  on   the   road   toward  free trade.

The  press  restrictions  were  also  abated.  Moderate  opposition papers  were  permitted,  where  criticism  was  veiled  under  the   form of   allusions.  The   Ofleanist  Journal  des   Debats,  the   Republican Siecle,   and   the   Figaro   began   to   be   published.  Political  life   had begun  again.

A   coalition  was   formed  between  the   enemies  of   the   Empire the   Republicans,  the   Orleanists,  and  even  the   Legitimists;  this was   known  as   the   Liberal  Opposition.  At   the   elections  of   1863, there  were  35   opposition  members  and  249  government  members. Paris   elected  none   but   oppositionists.

Meanwhile  Napoleon,  once  more  taking  up   the  democratic policy   set   forth  in   Napoleonic  Ideas,   carried  the   bill   of   1864   giving workingmen  the   rigjht   of   forming  unions.

In   the   Chamber  elected  in   1863   parliamentary  life   awoke  again. The   minority  tried  to   excite  public   opinion   by   speeches  against the   government.  They  attacked  their  military  expeditions (especially  the   Mexican  campaign),  their  expenses  and   their  borrowings (Berryer   in   1865   reproached  the   government  with   hav12

ing   in   12  years  created  a   deficit  equal   to   that   of   previous  governments in   50).   Their  system  of   police   and   of   repression  were also  attacked.  (Thiers  demanded  the   necessary  liberties).  The Catholic  party,  working  independently,  attacked  the  policy adopted  in   Italy.   The  contest  became  acute  when  the   government forbade  the   publication  of   the   Syllabus,  as   "   containing propositions  contrary  to  the   principles  upon  which  the   Constitution of   France  rested  "   (January,  1865).  The  bishops  protested; the   protestation  was  condemned  by   the   Council  of   State. The  speech  from  the   throne  promised  to   "   maintain  the   rights   of the   civil   power";  the   bishops  continued  to   protest.  The  Catholic party,   having   become  hostile  to   the   government,  made  war on   Duruy,  the   minister  of   public   education.  The  bishops  protested against   the   creation  of   a   course  of   secondary  education  for girls.   They   presented,  and   supported  before  the   Senate,   petitions denouncing  the   University  instruction  as  materialistic  (1868).

Little  by   little   there  grew  up   a   Liberal-Imperialist  party,   disposed to   sustain  the   Emperor,  but   dissatisfied  with   the   government of   his   ministers  ; the   latter  were  reproached  with  acting   each for   himself  and   arbitrarily.  The  Emperor,  who  was  now  beginning to   suffer   in   health,   and   who,   besides,   had   never  cared  to   occupy himself  with   home  affairs,   was  not  strong  enough   to   maintain harmony   among   his   ministers  and   to   prevent  their  abuse  of power.  The  Chamber,  deprived  of   all   control  over  the   ministers, was  reduced  to   the   registration  of   laws  and   budgets.  In   accordance with   the   doctrine  of   the   liberal  Constitutionalists,  they   demanded a   coherent  ministry,  wishing  to  secure  to   the   Chamber a   controlling  power  over  the   government  and  a  means  of   intervention in   general  politics.  A   group  of   deputies  constituted themselves  a   "   third  party   "   and   proposed  an  amendment  to   the address;  this  was  the   only   occasion  open   to  the   Chamber  for showing  an  opinion  on  general  political  affairs.  The   amendment received  63   votes  in   1865   and   again   in   1866.

The  third  party   demanded,  not  the   complete  parliamentary  system, but   what   was   known  as   the   "   development  of   political   liberty/* that   is   to   say,   a   responsible  ministry,  common  law   for   the press,   freedom  of   public   meeting  (in   1865   the   trial   of   the   thirteen had   just   taken  place:   thirteen  political   men  condemned  under  the law   forbidding  a   meeting  of   more  than  20  persons).  The  third party's  struggle  against  the   government  took  the  form  of   a rivalry   between  Rouher,  the   leading  minister,  a   declared  advocate of   the   autocratic  regime,   and   Ollivier,  one  of   the   5   Republican erty;

deputies,  who  had   entered  into   relations  with   the   Emperor  since 1864.  This  rivalry  covered  a   difference  of   views  regarding foreign   policy.  Rouher  favoured  war,  or  at   least  a   warlike  tone toward  Prussia  and  Italy,   as   did   also   the   Empress  and   the   Catholic party,   naturally  devoted  to   the   Pope   and   to   Austria.  The third  party   wanted  peace.

After  the   war  of   1866   and   the   Mexican  disaster,  the   Emperor, feeling   himself  isolated  in   Europe  and   disapproved  by   even  his own  subordinates,  decided  to   look  to   the   third  party   for   support. This  intention  he   announced  by   the   letter  of   January  19,   1867.

The   Liberal  Concessions  (1867-69). - The  new  regime   first   gave the   Chamber  the   right   of   questioning  the   ministers  on  every  act of   either  foreign   or   domestic  policy.   The   Senate's  function  was precisely  defined:  to   examine  every   law   passed   by   the   Chamber and   cancel  it   if   it   seemed  contrary  to   the   constitution.  The   Emperor had   also   promised  a   press   law   and   a   law   on  public   meetings. But   he   hesitated,  wavering  between  the   influence  of Rouher  and  that  of   Ollivier,  and   finally,   in   1868,   decided  to   present the   promised   laws. ings.

The  press   law   abolished  the   government's  discretionary  power, that   is   to   say,   the   regime   of   administrative  authorizations  and warnings.  A   permit  was  no   longer   necessary  for   establishing  a newspaper,  a   declaration  being   sufficient.  Journals  could  no longer   be   suppressed  save  by   judicial  process;  but   press   trials remained  subject  to   the   courts  of   summary  process,  not  to   jury courts;  and   press  offences  were  still   visited  with   heavy   penalties. It   was  still   forbidden  to   discuss  the   constitution  -or   to   publish anything  about  legislative  debates  except  the   official  report.

The  law   relating  to   public   meetings  permitted  any  seven  citizens to   hold  a   public   political  meeting,  on  signing  a   declaration assuming  responsibility  for   its   lawful  character.  It   had   to   be held   in   a   closed  hall   and   in   the   presence  of   a   government  agent empowered  to   break  it   up.   The  government  reserved  the   right to   postpone  or   to   forbid  any   such   meeting.

After  1866  the   government  tried  to   get   the   Chamber  to   agree to   a   new  military   organization.  The   army,   formed  partly   of   reenlisted  soldiers  or  substitutes,  partly   of   conscripts  drafted  for seven  years'   service,  was  a   small,   professional  army.   Even  by calling   out  the   reserve,  created  in   1861   and   formed  of   conscripts serving   only   a   few   months,  the   whole  army  amounted  to   only 600,000  men.  Military  obligation  was  very  unevenly  distributed, falling   only   on   the   poor.   In   place   of   substitution  the   government

## I   So        THE  REPUBLIC  AND    THE   DEMOCRATIC  EMPIRE.

had   in   1855   passed   a   law   allowing   a   money  payment  in   commutation of   the   service.  The  state  used  this   money  to  procure  an experienced  soldier  in   place   of   the   man  excused.  After  the   campaign of   1866,   Niel,   minister  of   war,  proposed  universal  military service  like   that   of   Prussia,  but   the   Chamber  would  not  consent to   it.   It   seemed  still   impossible  in   France,  as   in   all   other  European countries,  to   induce  the   young  men  of   the   middle  classes  to perform  military  service.  The  Republican  party   (Jules   Simon) proposed  to   adopt   the   Swiss  system :   universal  service  reduced  to a   few   weeks, - the   time   necessary  to   learn  the   trade,  - the   army   to be   transformed  into,  a   defensive  national  militia.  This  system would  have  required  a   policy   of   peace;   it   was   barely   discussed.

The  Chamber  finally  compromised,  granting  the  government a   service  of   nine   years   in   two  periods,   five   years  with   the   active army,  and   four   with   the   reserve - which  was  expected  to   yield   a force  of   800,000  men.  The  government  renounced  the   requirement of   actual  service  in   the   garde   mobile,   which  was  to   include  all those  exempted  from  service  in   the   army.  The  guard   was  officially created,   but   remained  on  paper  merely.

The  Republicans  took  advantage  of   the   partial   liberty   granted by   the   laws  of   1868   to   make  open  opposition  to   the   Empire   in their  papers  and  in   public   meetings.  This  was  the   time  of   the Lanterne  (founded  in   1868,   and   condemned  after  its   third  issue); of   the   subscription  in   honour  of   Baudin,  the   representative  killed in   the   coup   d'etat  of   1851,   and   of   the   trial   of   the   subscribers wherein  Gambetta  made  the  speech  which  made  him  famous (November,  1868).

In   the   Chamber,  the   deputies  who   favoured  autocratic  government, being   dissatisfied  with   the   Liberal  concessions  and   the policy   of   peace,   banded  themselves  together  as  a   party,  and   were known  as   the   Arcadiens  (they   met  at   the   Rue   de   1'Arcade).  Their program  was  to   force  a   war  in   order  to   re-establish  the   honour and  influence  of   France,  so  greatly   compromised  by   the   Prussian victories.  A   victorious  war,  they   thought,  would  strengthen  the Imperial  dynasty  and  permit   a   return  to   the   autocratic  regime.

The  liberal  Empire  and  the  Radical  Party  (1869-70). - The general  elections  of   1869   definitely  decided  Napoleon  to   adopt   a new  system.  Royalists  and  Republicans  were  united  against  the government.  The  opposition,  working  in   harmony,  had,   since 1863,   gained   a   million  and   a   half   of   voters,  while  the   government had  lost   a   million.  In   the   Chamber,  the   third  party   was   becoming the   ruling   force.  They   drew  up   an   interpellation  signed   by

116   deputies,  demanding  a   responsible  ministry.  United  with  40 deputies  of   the   Left   they   henceforth  held   the   majority.  The   Emperor at   first   granted   only   one-half;  he   promised  to   increase  the powers  of   the   House,  but   without  any  mention  of   the   ministry (July   12).   He   then   dismissed  Rouher,  changed  three  ministers, and  finally   accepted  a   plan   which  became  the   senatorial  decree of   September,  1869.

In   this   new  system,  the   Chamber  became  a  real  parliamentary assembly  like  that  of   England,  electing  its   officers  and   making its   own  rules.  It   had   the   initiative  in   lawmaking,  the   right   to demand  explanations  of   ministerial  policy   and  pronounce  a   decisive judgment   thereon;  the   right   to   vote  the   budget   and   to discuss  amendments  clause  by   clause.  The  Senate  also  became a   deliberative  body,   with  public   sessions,  the   right   to   question the   ministers,  and   to   make  its   own  rules.  It   had   the   power  to reject   any   bill   passed   by   the   Chamber  which  it   declared  to   be contrary  to   the   constitution.  The   ministers  deliberated  in   council; they   were   dependent  only   on   the   Emperor,  but   were  responsible, the   Senate   being,   however,  the   body   entitled  to   impeach them.  Ministerial  responsibility  was  thus  at   once  proclaimed  and rendered  nugatory.

Napoleon,  weakened  by   disease  (he   was   believed  to   be   dying   in August,  1869),   took  his   time   in   reorganizing  his   government.  He admitted  that  a  new  system  required  new  men  and  he   was  in negotiation  with  Ollivier,  leader  of   the   third  party;   but   he   wished to   keep   some  of   the   old   ministers.  Meanwhile,  contrary  to   the constitution,  he   neglected  to  convoke  the   Chamber.  When  it at   length   met,   he   announced  to   it   officially  a   system  of   government "   equally  removed  from  reaction  and  from  revolutionary theories,"  founded  at   once  on  order  and  liberty.  "   I   answer for   order;   help   me   to   save   liberty."

Thus  began  the  Liberal  Empire.  It   was  not  a   true  parliamentary system;   the   Emperor  continued  to   exercise  the   executive power   through   ministers  of   his   own  choice,   and   the   power of   changing  the   constitution  through  the   Senate,  whose  members he   himself  appointed.  As   to   the   policy   to   be   pursued,  the third   party   was   divided;  the   great   majority  followed  Ollivier,  who was  content  with  the   new  system.  A   group   led   by   old   parliamentarians (Buffet,   Daru)   was   disposed   to   demand  more  power for   the   elected  Chamber  and   formed  itself  into   the   Left   Centre; the   rest  of   the   third   party   became  the   Right   Centre.  The   old government  party   (the   official  deputies)  formed  the   Right;   the

Arcadians  took  the  Extreme  Right.  After  long   negotiations, Ollivier  was  charged  by   the   Emperor  to   form  a   homogeneous cabinet  representing  the   majority  in   the   Chamber.  This  was the   ministry  of   January  2,   1870,   composed  of   four  deputies  of the   Right   Centre,  four   of   the   Left   Centre,  and   three  of   the   previous ministry.  With  the   third  party   and   the   deputies  of   the Right  professedly  supporting  the   ministry,  it   had  an  enormous majority  in   the   Chamber  to   support  it   in   the   experiment  of   the Liberal  Empire.  It   announced  certain  measures  relating  to   the press,  the   repeal   of   the   law   of   1858,   and   permission  to   sell   newspapers in   the   streets.

The  Left  continued  in   opposition,  unable  to   forgive   Napoleon for   the   coup   d'etat   or   Ollivier  for   his   conversion  to   the   Empire. Although  powerless  in   the   Chamber,  where  they   controlled  hardly 40   votes,  they   had   the   advantage  of   representing  the   most  ardent part   of   political   France,  all   the   large   cities,   the   labouring  classes, and  the   students.  The  prefect  of   police   affirmed  this  as  early as  1867.  "   The  masses  .   .   .   remain  true  to   the   Emperor.  .   . The  active  portion  of   society,  that  which  is   most  interested  in politics,  is   strong   in   radical  and   systematic  opposition."  The Left  opposed  the   Empire  in   the   name  of   liberty   and   the   parliamentary system  ; but   they   were  mainly   Republicans.

An  openly  Republican  party,  the   Irreconciliables,  had  been organized  during  the   elections  of   1869.   It   was  made  up   of   the remains  of   the   Republican  party   of   '48   and   the   young  generation brought  up   under  their  influence.  This  party  revived  the   traditions of   the   democratic  republic  of   1793   and   1848.   The   majority of   the   party,   who   began   to   be   known  as   the   Radicals,  demanded in   the   name  of   the   sovereignty  of   the   nation  a   regime   similar  to that   of   Switzerland  and   the   United  States.  This   appeared  in   the Belleville  program  (Gambetta's  election  program  in   1869).  It demanded  "   the   most  radical  application  of   universal  suffrage   " in   the   election  of   municipal  councillors  and   of   deputies - "individual liberty   placed   under  the   shield  of   the   law,"   liberty   of   the   press, of   public   meetings  and   clubs,   and   jury   trial   for   all   political  offences- "   primary  lay   instruction,  gratuitous  and  compulsory," "   competitive  examination  for   admission  to   the   higher   courses  " - separation  of   Church  and  state - "   suppression  of   standing" armies  " - modification  of   the  tax  system - the   election  of   all officials - "   direct  responsibility  of   all   officials,"  the   suggestion being   that   Article  75   of   the   Constitution  of   the   year   VIII.,   then still   in   force,   should  be   repealed.  This   article  forbade  the   prose-

eution  of   an  official  for   abuse  of   power,  except   by   consent  of   the government.*

The  Republican  party  excited  public   interest  by   demonstrations against  the   Empire.  The  most  effective  was  at   the   funeral  of Victor  Noir  (January  2,   1870),   who  had   been  killed  by   Prince Pierre  Bonaparte.  There  were  at   least  100,000  persons  present, and   they   seemed  disposed  to   make  an  outbreak.  Since  1866  there had   been  a   series  of   strikes  in   the   country  and   small  uprisings  in Paris.  But  Paris  at   the   end   of   the   Empire  was  no   longer   the Paris  of   1848;   it   had   been   enlarged  by   all   the   suburbs  within  the fortifications  (8   new  arrondissements),  inhabited  by   workingmen and   strongly  Republican.  The  former  barricading  quarters  were wiped   out  or   traversed  by   great   avenues  without  paving   stones, and  open  to   a   cavalry   charge   or  artillery   fire.  No   insurrection could  any  more  avail  against  the   Paris  garrison  provided  with perfected  arms.  The  street  warfare  which  had  once  done  so much  for   the   Republicans  was  now  out  of   the   question.

With  the   Radical  party   were  mingled  Socialists,  few   in   number, without  organization  and  without  a  party  program,  disciples  of Proudhon  (Mutualists),  advocating  social  reform  by   industrial association,  partisans  of   state  intervention,  and  a  revolutionary Blanquist  group.  But  the   political  contest  absorbed  all   public interest.  The  Belleville  program  limited  itself  to   a   vague  allusion to   the   "   economic  reforms  which  affect  the   social  problem,  the solution  of   which  is   almost  dependent  on  political  transformation."

Even  in   the   heart  of   the   ministry  the   Left   Centre  demanded  the repeal   of   the   two  remaining  features  of   the   autocratic  regime:   the right   of   the   government  to   fix   the   boundaries  of   electoral  districts and   to   present   official  candidates  ;   and,   secondly,  the   exclusive power  of   the   Senate  in   amending  the   constitution.  The Left   took  advantage  of   this   to   expose  the   false  position  of   the ministers.  Jules   Favre  called  them  "   the   sentinels  who  mount guard  over  the   personal  government  in   order  to   make  us  credit the   existence  of   a   parliamentary  regime"  The  Left  then  persuaded Ollivier  to   declare  himself  publicly   against   the   system  of official  candidature.  A   portion  of   the   Right,   irritated  by   this declaration,  broke  away   from  the   majority,  and   formed  a   group of   imperialist  opposition  (February  26).   Ollivier,  bound  by   his promises  of   reform,  finally   proposed  to   the   Senate  a   revision  of the   constitution.

The  revision  was  accepted  (April  20),   and  the   constitution

*   It   remained  in   force  till   1870.

modified  in   accordance  with  the  parliamentary  system.  The Senate  became,  like   that   of   all   other  countries,  an  upper   house, sharing  the   legislative  power  with  the   elected  house.  Its   constitution-making power,   created  in   1852,   was  taken  from   it   and given   to   the   nation;   that   is   to   say,   no  change   could  be   made  in   the constitution  except  by   plebiscite.

On  the   advice  of   Rouher,  the   Emperor  decided  to   apply   the new  principle  by   inviting  the   people   to   vote  on  this   proposition: "   The   French  nation  approves  the   liberal  reforms  made  in   the constitution  since  1860,   and   ratifies  the   senatorial  decree  of   April 20,   1870."  The  affirmative  vote  showed  at   once  that  the   people ratified  the   liberal  reforms  by   accepting  the   transformation  of   the imperial  regime,   "   and   that   they   desired  to   retain  the   Emperor  and facilitate  the   transmission  of   the   crown  to   his   son."  The  Republicans declared   that   they   regarded   the   plebiscite   as   a   means  of confiscating  the   national  will   and   decided  to   vote  no.   The   autocratic Imperialists  and   Liberals  voted  yes.   The  ministry  ordered all   officials  to   display   a   "   devouring  activity   "   in   urging   the affirmative  vote.  The  plebiscite  of   May   8   gave  more  than 7,000,000  yes.   and   1,500,000  no.

The  liberal  Empire  seemed  consolidated  by   this   enormous  majority. But   the   Left   Centre  ministers,  who   opposed  the   plebiscite, had   retired.  Daru,   advocate  of   peace,  was  replaced  in   the office  of   foreign   affairs  by   an  enemy  of   Prussia  and   Italy,   the Duke  of   Gramont.  He   it   was  who  embroiled  France  in   the   war with  Prussia.  The  belligerent  and  autocratic  party   resumed  control of   the   government;  the   ministry,  constituted  on  a   peace  program, let   itself   be   persuaded  to   declare  war   in   the   name  of national  honour.  The  Chamber  supported  the   ministry  by   refusing (159   votes  against   84)   to   exact  the   communication  of   diplomatic documents,  and   by   voting   an  appropriation  of   500,000,000 francs  for   the   mobilization  of   the   army.   They   were,   however, counting  on  a  sure  victory;  the   minister  of   war  said:  "We  are ready,   more  than  ready   ";   and   Ollivier:  "   We   accept  the   responsibility with   a   light   heart." gram,

At   the   news  of   the   first   defeats,   the   ministry   was  abandoned  by the   majority,  a   declaration  of   want  of   confidence  was  passed   by the   Chamber.  The  Empress,  acting   as  regent   in   the   absence  of the   Emperor,  who  had   gone   to   the   front,   intrusted  General  Palikao  with  the   task  of   forming  a  ministry.  This  ministry,  taken from  the   belligerent  Right,   was  the   last   ministry  of   the   Empire.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.

For   a   bibliography  see  chap.   v.

SOURCES. - For  parliamentary,  legislative,  and  judicial  documents, and  the   annuals,  see  the   preceding  chapter.  Of   the  parliamentary  documents the   most   important  is   the   Inquiry   regarding  May   15   and   the   Days   of June.  For  the   newspapers,  which  were  very  numerous  from  1848   to  1851, see  "   Catal.  de   1'Hist.  de   France,"  vol.   iv.   The  leading  publications  of the   Imperial  period   are  :   Journal  des   Dtbats  (Liberal),  the   £/&lt;?&lt;:/*  (Repub.), the   Temps  (since   1861),   the   Pays   (Imperialist),  the   fJnivers  (Catholic).

In   the   category  of   memoirs  and  correspondence  :

ON  THE  PERIOD  1848-51.-  Odilon  Barrot,  4   vols.,  1875.- Tocqueville,  1893. Proudhon,  1849. - Caussidiere,  2  vols.,  1849   (details  for   the  prefecture  of police).- De   la   Hodde,   "La  Naissance  de   la   Republique,"  1850   ;   the   author was  a   spy   connected  with  the   secret  societies.- L.   Blanc,   "   Revolution  de Fevrier  au   Luxembourg,"  1849. - E.   Thomas,  "   Hist,  des   Ateliers  Nationaux," 1848. - The  following  histories  can  only   be   regarded  as  recollections  : llamartine,  1849;  Gamier-Pages,  1861  ;   L.Blanc,  1870.

ON   THE   COUP  D'ETAT.- Pascal  Duprat,  "   Les   Tables  de   Proscription  de   L I Bonaparte,"  2   vols.,  1852.

ON  THE  PERIOD   1851-70.- De   Maupas,  2  vols.,   1884.- H.   de   Viel-Castel,  6 ,vols.,  1884;   untrustworthy. - Granier  de   Cassagnac,  3   vols.,  1879. - Hausmann, 1890   ; Persigny,  1896,   both  of   little   real   value. - Darimon,  various  works,  each with  a   title,   forming  a   series  of   recollections. - Ollivier,  a   series  under  varilous   titles. - Ebeling,i89i.-  Beaumont- Vassy,  1874.- Bane,   1878.- See   especially ! Senior  (Nassau-W.),    "   Conversations  with  Thiers,  Guizot,"  etc.,  2  vols., 1878,   a   collection  of   interviews  with  persons  of   different  parties   from  1852 to   1860,   details  on   France's  internal  system  during  the   period   when  the newspapers  could  not  write  fceely. - "   La   Censure  sous  Napoleon  III.,   185266,"   1892   ;   reports  on   the   dramatic  "censorship.-"  Papiers  et   Corresp.  de   la Famille  Imperiale,"  2   vols.,   1870-72;  completed  by   E.   Halt,   "   Papiers  Sauves des   Tuileries,"   1871,   a   collection  of   documents  of   all   sorts  found  in   the jTuileries,   published  by   the   republican  government.

WORKS. - There  is   no  satisfactory  general  history.

ON   THE   REVOLUTION  OF  1848. - Dan.  Stern  (Comtesse  d   'Agout),  "   Hist,  de a   Revol.  de   1848,"   3   vols.,   1850   (Repub.;. - V.Pierre,  "   Hist,   dela  Repub,   de 848,"   2   vols.,   1873-78   (Conservative).-!.  Stein,   "   Gesch.  der   Sozialen  Beweung   in   Frankreich,"  1850,   is   so   far   the   most  scientific  work  on   the   Revoution  of   1848.

ON   THE  REPUBLIC. - V.Pierre,  already  mentioned. - P.   delaGorce,  "   Hist, lela  2«   Repub.  Franc..,"  2   vols.,  1887   (strongly  Conservative). - E,   Spuller, ' Hist.   Parlement  de   la   2«   Repub.,"  1891.- Thirria,  "   Napoleon  III.  avant 'Empire,"   vol.   ii.,   1895.

ON   THE  EMPIRE. - P. delaGorce,  vols.  i.   and   ii.,   1894-96,  in   course  of   publiation,   (Conservative). - Taxile  Delord,  "   Hist,  du   2e   Empire,"  6   vols.,  1870, Repub.),  still   the   most  complete  work.- Bulle,"  Gesch.  des   Zweiten  Kaisereichs  und  des  Konigreichs  Italien  "   (Oncken  coll.),   a   scientific  populariation.

MONOGRAPHS  ON  SPECIAL  EVENTS. - E.   Tenet,  "   La   Province  en   Decembre,

## 1  86        THE  REPUBLIC  AND    THE  DEMOCRATIC  EMPIRE.

51,"    1865.     "   Paren    Decembre,    1851,"   1868,   story   of   the   coup Repub.).- E.   Tenot,  "   Les   Suspects  en  1858,"  1869. d'État

ON  THE  END  OF  THE  EMPIRE.- D 'Abrantes,  "   Essai  sur   la   Regence  de 1870,"  1879.

ON  FINANCE. - G.   du   Puynode,  "   L'Administration  des  Finances  en  184849,"   1849. - DeNervo,  "Les  Finances  de   la   France  de   1852   a   1860,"   5   vols., 1861.

## CHAPTER  VII.

## THE  PARLIAMENTARY  REPUBLIC.

Government  of  National  Defence. - The  Imperial  government defended  itself   against   the   Republican  population  of   Paris by   means  of   its   army.   When  the   army  was   lost   in   the   Prussian war  the   Empire  fell   without  resistance.  At   the   news  of   the capitulation  of   Sedan,  the   Left  proposed  that  the   Corps   Legislatif   should  vote  the   fall   of   the   Empire   and   elect   a   committee  of government  (September  3).   The  ministers  tried  to   save  the   Regency by   bringing  up  a  project  signed  by   the   Empress,  instituting a   council  of   5 deputies  (September  4,   1870).  Thiers  proposed a   committee.  The  Corps   Legislatif,  however,  had  no  time to   vote;  the   mob  broke  in   crying:  "Down  with  the  Empire! Long   live   the   Republic ! "   and   the   Republic  was  proclaimed  in the   midst  of   tumult.  The  Paris  deputies,  uniting   with  Trochu, the   military  governor,  constituted  a   "   Government  of   National Defence."  This  government  refused  to   negotiate  with  the   Chamber, and,   holding   to   Republican  tradition,  established  itself  in the   Hotel  de   Ville.  As   in   1848,   the   Republic  grew  out  of   an insurrectionary  movement.  But  in   '48   it   was   imposed  by   a   bare half   of   Paris   upon  all   the   rest  of   France,  whereas  in   1870   it   was demanded  by   a   large   party   which  controlled  all   the   large   cities and   a   part   of   the   centre  and   east.  In   Lyons,   Bordeaux,  and Marseilles  the   Republic  had   been  proclaimed  without  waiting  for news  from  Paris. posed tuting

The   Government  of   the   National  Defence  lasted  till   the   end   of the   war.  It   divided  itself  into  two  sections:  the   principal  portion was   besieged   with   the   rest  of   Paris ;   a   delegation   of   3   members, re-enforced  presently  by   Gambetta's  escape   from  Paris  in a   balloon  (October  6),   governed  the   rest  of   France.  It   was  stationed first   at   Tours,  later  at   Bordeaux.

In   Paris   the   government  experienced  a   crisis  like   that   in   1848. The   Republican  party,  as   in   '48,   was  made  up   of   Democrats  and Socialists;  the   Democrats  alone  had  taken  command.  But  in 187

organizing  the   national  guard   arms  were  given   to   all   the   ablebodied  men  in   Paris  (over   300,000),  which  placed  the   government at   the   mercy  of   the   national  guards.  A   revolutionary party,   following  the   eternal  insurgent  Blanqui,  demanded  the creation  of   a   Commune  of   Paris  elected  by   universal  suffrage,  as in   1792.   They   adopted  the   Blanquist  tactics  of   a   sudden  attack on  the   seat  of   government,  and  took  advantage  of   the   public feeling   against   Trochu,  who  was  accused  of   having   made  a   weak defence  for   the   city.   At   the   news  of   the   capitulation  of   Metz and  of   the   armistice  officially  proclaimed,  the   national  guards   of Belleville  marched  on  the   Hotel  de   Ville  and   took  possession  of it,   crying:   "War  to   the   death!  Commune!"  They   held  the government  prisoner  (October  31)   until  it   was  released  by   the national  guards  of   other  parts   of   the   city.   Then,   to   strengthen its   position,  the   government  organized  a  plebiscite  of   the   inhabitants of   Paris,   and   won  a   heavy   majority  in   favour  of   its   powers (357&gt;oo°  yes&gt;   62,000  no).   There  was  only   one  other  attack  on the   Hotel  de   Ville,   at   the   end   of   the   siege;   the   government,  for answer,  closed  the  clubs  and  appointed  two  councils  of   war (January  22).

In   the   country  the   delegation  was   directed  by   Gambetta,  minister of   the   interior  and   of   war,  who   exercised  an  almost  absolute authority.  He   replaced  the   imperial  officials  with   an   improvised set   of   his   own  choosing,  appointed  local  agents   invested with  indefinite  powers,  dissolved  the   councils  general  of   the   departments (December   25),   ordered  levies  of   men  and   requisitions oi   supplies,  issued  proclamations  and  commands  as   if   he   were a   king.   He   worked  in   the   name  of   the   nation's  welfare,  without control,   as   had   been   done   in   1793.   He   met  with   no  resistance, except   an  outbreak  at   Lyons,   where  a   body   of   guerrillas (franc-tireurs)  occupied  the   prefecture  (September  22)   and   tried to   establish  a   commune.  The  federations  of   departments,  which were  formed  under  the   name  of   leagues  (League  of   the   West  at Rennes,  of   the   South  at   Toulouse,  of   the   Southeast  at   Marseilles), existed  only   in   name.

The  government  called  itself  provisional;  the   nature  of   the   government to   be   established  must  depend  on  the   decision  of   two questions:  What  government  will  the  Germans  recognise? \Vhat  will  be   the   sovereign  assembly  elected  by   the   French? The  difficulty  was  to   get   Germany  to   accept  the   Republic  and   to get   the   voters  to   ratify   it.

The  German  government  hesitated.     Bismarck  had  an   inter-

itw   with   Jules   Favre,   the   delegate   from  the   National  Defence, Ferrieres  (September  19),   without  any  result.     Favre  would tertain   no  cession   of    territory   and    Bismarck   insisted   on urrender  of   a   fort   commanding  Paris  in   exchange  for   an  armisce.     There  was  still   in   Metz  an   Imperial  army;  the   general-inief,   Bazaine,  sent  a   request  to   the   King   of   Prussia  that   this rmy  might   be   allowed  to   march  out  and   restore  order  and   the Empire  in   Paris.     The   King   agreed,   on  condition  that   the   army eclared  itself  ready   to   maintain  the   power  of   the   Empress  as egent,   and   that   the   Empress  should  call   on   the   nation  to   ratify e   peace  and   the   cession  of   the   territories  demanded  by   Prusia.      The   Empress,  in   London,  on   the   advice  of   her   council,  delared  herself  unable  to   accept  any  mutilation  of   France  (Octoer   23)   and   demanded  an  armistice  for   the   army  at   Metz.    The jKing   refused,  and   Bazaine's  army  capitulated  a   few   days   later. After  this   the   German  government,  renouncing  the   re-establishment of   the   Empire,  negotiated  only   with  the   National  Defence and  tried  to   secure  the   election  of   a  representative  assembly which  alone  could  conclude  terms  of   peace. at

The  government  at   Paris  hesitated.  "They   believed  that  the [voters   would  elect  a   Republican  assembly,  but   they   knew  that j:he   prevailing  sentiment  was   for   peace,  and   they   insisted,  for   the ihonour  of   France,  upon  continuing  the   war  to   the   very  end.  The (Delegation  of   Tours  had   appointed  a   general  election  for   October 16;   the   government  of   Paris  annulled  the   decree,  and  sent Phiers  to   the   German  camp  to   negotiate  for   a   truce.  Bismarck demanded  some  of   the   forts  of   Paris,   then  proposed  to   have  the assembly  elected  without  an  'armistice;  the   government  refused. Outside  Paris  Gambetta  was  urging  war  to   the   bitter  end.  The moment  for   securing  a   Republican  assembly  was  thus  allowed  to lip   by.   An   impression  got   abroad  that   the   election  of   Repubicans   would  mean  the   continuation  of   the   war.

The   Election  of   the   Assembly  and   the   Commune. - In   signing he   capitulation  of   Paris  the   government  accepted  an  armistice hat   a   National  Assembly  might   be   elected.  They   went  back  to he   forms  of   1848.   The   elections  were  made  by   general  ticket or  each  department,  the   Whole  number  of   deputies  being   fixed it   750.   A   plurality  was  sufficient  to   elect.  The   deputies  were o   be   paid   at   the   rate   fixed  in   1848.   Gambetta,  at   Bordeaux, idded,   contrary  to   the   conditions  of   the   armistice,  a   clause  defaring   ineligible  all   persons  who  had   been  officials  or   deputies &gt;r   official  candidates  under  the   Empire.  He   thus  placed   him-

self   in   open  opposition  to   the   government  at   Paris,   which  annulled his   decree.

The  election  of   February  8,   1871,   was   held  without  preparation. The   Imperialists,  whom  Gambetta  had   wished  to   shut  out, dared  not  present  themselves.  The  electors  had  the   choice,  in Paris,   between  government  partisans  and  revolutionists.  In   the country  the   choice  was  between  Republicans  supported  by   the Bordeaux  delegation  on  the   one  hand,  and  opponents  of   Gambetta, mostly   Royalists   and   dissenting  Republicans,  on   the   other. Paris  elected  many  revolutionists;  the   invaded  departments  and the   southeast  sent  chiefly   Republicans.  But   in   almost  all   the   rest of   France  the   peasants  avoided  the   Republican  ticket  as   the   "   war ticket  "   and   voted  for   the   "   peace  ticket,"  that   is   to   say,   in   opposition to   Gambetta.  As  in   1849,   tne  majority  in   the   Assembly was  made  up   of   men  of   the   old   monarchist  parties   (Orleanists and  Legitimists),  elected  by   the  peasants.  The  Republicans nicknamed  it   the   "   Assembly  of   clod-hoppers."

The  Assembly,  meeting  at   Bordeaux,  refused  to   proclaim  the Republic  and  declared  that  they   "   would  await  the   nation's  decision as   to   the   definitive  form  of   government."  They   limited themselves  to   the   election  of   a   head   of   the   executive  power   (Thiers, the   popular  man  of   the   moment),  who  should  exercise  his   power under  the   supervision  of   the   Assembly  and   with  the   aid   of   ministers chosen   and   directed  by   himself.  This  was  the   compact  of Bordeaux  (February  17).   Thiers  chose  his  ministers  among moderate  Republicans  and  declared  himself  to   be   without  a   program, except   to   bring   peace   to   the   country,  restore  France's credit,  and   revive  her   industry.  The   Assembly  voted  for   peace and  the   deposition  of   Napoleon,  then  established  itself  at   Versailles (March,   1871).

The  population  of   Paris,   already  wearied  with  a   long   siege, were  unwilling  to   obey   the   Assembly  of   Versailles,  which  they suspected  of   wishing  to   suppress  the   Republic  and   deprive  Paris of   its   position   as   the   capital   of   France.  Two   practical  measures completed  the  exasperation  of   the   Parisians.  The  Government of   the   National  Defence  had,   during   the   siege,   suspended  the payment  of   rents  and   notes  in   Paris.  The   Assembly  refused  to prolong  the  stay-law.  In   the   course  of   negotiations  with  the Germans  for   the   disarmament  of   the   garrison  of   Paris,   Favre  had insisted  upon  the   national  guardsmen  retaining  their  arms;  the Parisians  had  thus  remained  armed.  The  pay  of   the   national guard  (a   franc  and  a   half   a   day)   was  the   only   means  of   sub-

ELECTION  OF   THE  ASSEMBLY  AND    THE   COMMUNE,    191

sistence  for   many  while  awaiting  a  renewal  of   ordinary  occupations. The   Assembly  suppressed  this   payment,  except  in   the case  of   persons  provided  with  a   certificate  of   indigence.

There  was  in   Paris  a  revolutionary  party  with  a  vaguely  socialist tendency,   made   up   chiefly   from   the   eastern  suburbs.  This party  set  on   foot  a   "   Republican  Federation  of   the   National Guard,"  with  the   avowed  object   of   defending  the   interests  of   the national  guard   and  of   resisting  every  attempt  against  the   Republic (March   3).   The   federation  was  to   be   directed  by   a   Central Committee  of   60   delegates.  The   Central  Committee,  constituted on   March  15,   was  in   reality   composed  of   only   about  30 delegates,  but   it   acted  as   the   representative  of   the   whole  national guard   and  undertook  to   place   Paris  in   rebellion,  and   act  as   its government. tral

Several  cannon  had  been  brought  to   Montmartre  by   the   national guards;   the   provisional  Central  Committee  having   refused to   give   them  up,   the   Versailles  government  sent  soldiers  to   seize them,   but   they   were  repulsed.  Two  generals  were  captured  and shot  by   the   insurgents.  The  Central  Committee  installed  itself at   the   Hotel  de   Ville   (March   10).   Thus  the   insurrection  began. Only   a   part   of   Paris  accepted  the   insurgent  government.  The national  guards  of   the   western  quarters  adhered  to   the   "   party of   order,"   that   is   to   say,   the   government  of   the   Assembly.  They made  a  pacific   demonstration  which'  ended  in   a   massacre.  The mayors  of   Paris  negotiated  between  the   Central  Committee  and the   Assembly;  they   obtained,  to   appease  the   Parisians,  delay   in the   .collection  of   rents  and   debts,   the   right   of   the   national  guard to   elect   its   own  officers  and   the   election  of   the   members  of   the Communal  Council  of   Paris  by   universal  suffrage.  The  election on   March  26   gave  a   strong  majority  to   the   partisans  of   the   Central Committee;  the   members  elected  by   the   party   of   conciliation refused  to   sit.   The   rupture  was  complete.

The  French  government  had  evacuated  Paris  and  the  forts, even  Mont  Valerien,  which  it   had   reoccupied.  Whether  because Thiers  thought  himself  unable  to   dispute  Paris  with  the   insurgents or   because  he   wished  for   a   war  to   get   rid   of   the   revolutionary party,   the   government  had   not  supported  the   national  guards of   its   own  party   in   Paris,   and   had   concentrated  all   its   troops  at Versailles  to   defend  the   Assembly.  Paris  was  thus  in   insurrection against   the   rest   of   France.

The  "   Council  General  "   of   the   Commune  assumed  the   government ; but   the   Central  Committee  continued  to   sit   in   order,   as

it   said,   to   serve  as  a   link   between  the   Council  and   the   national guard ;   and   there   was  no   division  of   powers   between  the   two.  It was  this   motley   government  that   bore  the   name  of   the   Commune.

It   began   by   disarming  the   national  guards   favourable  to   the Assembly.  It   established  compulsory  military  service  for  all able-bodied  men,  and  declared  void  all   acts  of   the   "   Versailles government."  It   established  ten  committees,  the   chief  one   being the   Executive  Committee  of   seven  members,  which  was  replaced later   by   nine  delegates,  one  from  each  of   the   other  committees; each   of   these  nine  took  the   title  of   a   minister  as   if   it were  at   the   head   of   a   department.

The  Commune  adopted  the  Republican  calendar  and  the  red flag,   which  had   become  the   emblem  of   the   Socialist  party,   but   it was  made  up   of   a   coalition  of   revolutionists  without  a   common program.  Of  the  78   new  members  sitting  in   the  Council, only   a   score,  members  of   the   International,  had   projects   of   social reform  (Varlin,  Malon,  Frankel) ;   a   score  were  Blanquists,  partisans of   a   violent  revolution,  without  definite  aim;   the   rest  were democrats  of   the   pattern  of   1793,   inaccurately  called  Jacobins (Valles,  Rigault),  Mountaineers  of   '49,   with  vague  socialistic  aspirations (Delescluze,  F.   Pyat),   or  perhaps   sceptics   who   had joined   the   revolution  for   the   sake   of   power.

The  Commune  was  never  anything  more  than  a   tumultuous organization  born  of   insurrection.  It   was  regarded  both  in France  and  abroad  as  a   gathering  of   adventurers  without  political standing.  Its   supporters,  who  called  themselves  Federes, were  known  under  the  name  of   Communards.  They   were  not even  recognised  as   belligerents;  from  the   beginning  of   the   fighting the   government  had   its   prisoners  shot.  The  Commune  replied by   imprisoning  notable  persons  "   suspected  of   an  understanding with   Versailles,"  as   hostages   doomed  to   be   shot   by   way of   reprisal.  ,

In   several  large   cities  (Marseilles,  Toulouse,  Saint-Etienne, Narbonne)  a  revolutionary  party  tried  to  establish  a  commune, independent  of   the   National  Assembly.  All  these  movements were  quickly  suppressed.  At   Lyons  alone  an   irregular  government established  itself   peaceably;  it   set   up   the   red   flag,   but   in   the end  quietly   dispersed.  The  civil  war  was  confined  to   Paris.  It began  with  a   march  of   the   insurgents  on   Versailles;  but   it   soon took  the   form  of   a   siege   of   Paris  by   the   national  army,  now  reorganized and   in   possession  of   Mont  Valerien.

The  Commune,  busied  with  the   war,   failed  to   organize  a   gov-

eminent  or  even  a   police.   In   the   matter  of   social  reforms  it   voted only   certain  measures  of   detail  proposed  by   the   Internationalists; it   did   not   even  attempt  to   seize   the   money  of   the   Bank  of   France. Its   chief   political   act   was  the   proclamation  of   April   19,   which  expressed the   theory   of   government  as   "   absolute  communal autonomy  extended  to  all   parts  of   France."  AH  communes should  exercise  "the  rights   inherent  in   the   commune:  the   right of   voting   the   communal  budget,  of   fixing   and   apportioning  the taxes - of   controlling  the   local   services - of   organizing  the   magistracy, internal   police,   and   education - of   administering  the   communal property  - of   choosing  public   officers  by   election  or competition,  with  permanent  right   of   dismissal - of   organizing the   national  guard,  which  should  elect  its   own  officers,  and should  be   sole  guardian  of   order." - "   The  unity   of   France  " would  thus  be   assured  by   the   association  of   the   "   communes  adherent to   the   contract  "  ;   each   commune  should  be   sovereign,  and the   communes  should  be   united  by   a   federal  tie.  This  was  the opposite  of   the   regime   upheld   hitherto  by   the   French  revolutionary party,   which,   following  the   traditions  of   the   Convention  of 1792,   had   ordinarily  favoured  an  all-powerful  central  government - that  is   to  say,   Paris  directly  governing  France.  But  the theory   of   communal  autonomy,  perhaps  introduced  by   Bakounine,   harmonized  with  the, existing  situation  of   the   Commune; in   insurrection  against   the   central  government  of   France  it   asked only   for   the   control  of   Paris,   hoping   to   control  France  indirectly by   the   example  Paris  should  give   to   the   other  communes. munal

This  regime   came  to   an  end   with  the   taking   of   Paris.    The burnings  and   the   massacre  of   the   hostages  perpetrated  during   the street  fights   were  without  authority  of   the   Council,  which  had   already   dispersed.      But     the     impression    prevailed    throughout France  that   the   supporters  of   the   Commune  had   made  a   systematic attempt   to   destroy   Paris,   and   it   seemed  legitimate  to   treat hem  as  criminals.     This  was  the   fiercest  civil   war  of   the   century, nd   the   suppression  of   the   revolt  was  the   bloodiest.     Many   taken with  arms  in   their  hands  were  shot  on  the   spot.     The  official itatement  of   the   number  of   burials  was   6500   (the   true  number tilled   is   unknown).     The   prisoners  were  judged   by   councils  of war;  7500  were  sent  to   New  Caledonia;  there  were  13,000  condemnations.    Those   in   authority  disregarded  the   French  usage vhich  distinguishes  political  crimes  from  common-law  crimes; hey   condemned,  without  precise   rules,   some  to  the   political punishment  of   transportation,  others  to   imprisonment  with   hard

13

labour  as  ordinary  criminals.  Those  who  had   escaped  were  condemned as   fugitives  from  justice.  The  councils  of   war  went  on until  1876;   in   that   year   they   condemned  52   persons.  The  revolutionary party,   exhausted  by   this   "   blood-letting,"  was  unable to   make  head  as  a  party  any  more.  There  remained  only   two parties   in   the   field,   the   Republican  and   the   Monarchical.

Government  of   Thiers  (1871-73).- The  Assembly  had  been elected  without  limit  of   term.  . After  the   complementary  elections of   July,   1871,   it   was  evident  that   a   majority   of   the   voters  wished to   maintain  the   republic.  But   the   Assembly  held  the   sovereign power,  and   there  was  no   legal   method  of   compelling  it   to   relinquish it;   it   retained  control  for   nearly   five   years   (February,  1871January,  1876).  In   spite   of   the   protestations  of   the   Left,   which denied  its   "   constituent  "   power,  and   in   spite   of   petitions  demanding its   dissolution,  it   took  upon   itself  the   task   of   giving   France  a constitution.

It   was  a   time   of   parliamentary  agitation.  The  Assembly  had no  compact  majority;  it   was  divided  into  groups:  Legitimist Extreme  Right,  Royalist  Right,  Orleanist  Parliamentary  Right Centre,  Republican  Left  Centre,  Republican  Left,   Extreme  Left, besides  the   Imperialist  party,  which  had   been  strengthened  at   the complementary  elections.  Certain  independents  formed  small groups  which  wavered  between  the   two  Centres.

The  government  was  throughout  strictly  parliamentary;  the ministry  held  office  only   so   long   as   it   had   the   support  of   a   majority in   the   Assembly.  Public  policy   therefore  depended  always on  the   grouping  of   parties   necessary  in   order  to   form  a   majority, and  the   decisive  question  was  : Shall  the   grouping  be   of   the   Centres against   the   Extremes,  or  of   all   the   Rights   against   all   the Lefts?  The  two  Centres  had  roughly  the   same  political  ideal:  a liberal  parliamentary  government  controlled  by   the   middle  class and  favourable  to  the   clergy.  The  Left  Centre  was  composed chiefly   of   old   Orleanists  like   Thiers,  who   had   gone  over  to   the Republic  and   universal  suffrage.  Between  the   two   Centres  there was  hardly  a  point   of   difference  except  as   to   the   form  of   the government.

The  grouping  was  made  in   the   first  instance  by   an  agreement between  the   two   Centres  against   the   two  extremes.  The   Assembly, accepting  provisionally  the   existing  government,  voted  the law   proposed  by   Rivet,   giving   to   Thiers  the   title   of   President  of the   Republic  with  the   powers  of   a   parliamentary  king,   but   making him   responsible  to   the   Assembly  (August  31,   1871).   The   Ex-

treme  Left   voted  against   it,   in   order  not   to   recognise  the   constituent power  of   the   Assembly.  The   harmony  between  the   Centres lasted  nearly   two  years;   it   was   during   this   period   that   the   Assembly did   its   work   of   reorganization.  It   recalled  the   Princes  of Orleans  and   restored  to   them  their  estates  ; issued  loans  of   2,000,000,000  in   June,   1871,   and   3,000,000,000  in   July,   1872,   for   the liberation  of   territory;  abolished  the   legal-tender  quality   of   bank notes;  passed   the   municipal  and   departmental  laws  of   1871   and the   military   law   of   1872.

In   departmental  administration  the   Assembly  established  the decentralization  which  the   Liberal  opposition  had   demanded  under the   Empire;  it   increased  the   powers  of   the   council  general, granted  it   two  sessions  yearly,   made  its   meetings  public,  and created  the   departmental  committee,  elected  by   the   council,  to oversee  matters  during   the   interval  between  sessions.  The  right of   electing   the   mayors  of   the   smaller  communes  was  given   to   the municipal  councils.

The  first   step   taken  in   military   affairs  was  to   do   away  with   the national  guard   (1871).  "   Of   what  use   is   it   to   arm  everybody?  " said   the   report.   "   Against   whom?  Against  everybody,  since  the disturbers  are  not   distinct  in   the   mass  of   the   nation."  The   army was  made  over  on  the   Prussian  plan,   recruited  by   compulsory universal  service  without  'right   of   finding  substitutes.  It   was divided,  as   in   Prussia,  into   four   parts:   active  army,  reserve,  territorial army,   territorial  reserve,  with   periodical  practice.  Educated young  men  were  granted  the   privilege  of   serving  one  year  as  volunteers, with   the   obligation   of   finding   their   own  equipment,  as   in Prussia,  but   with  the   requirement  of   paying  the   government  a fixed  sum  for   the   ordinary  equipment  (1500   francs).  None  were exempted  from  military  service  but  Church  men,  teachers,  and sons  of   widows.  The  Assembly  wanted  a   three-years'  term  in the   active  army,  as   in   Prussia;  but   Thiers,  who  still   preferred  a lengthy   service,  compelled  the   acceptance  of   a   compromise,  a   fiveyear  service;  and   as   it   was   impossible  to   maintain  at   once   five   full classes  under  arms,  they   had   to   resort  to   drawing   lots   in   order  to divide  each  year's   contingent  into   two  sections,  the   one  to   serve five   years,   the   other  only   six   months.

The   Assembly  increased  the   revenue  by   new  taxes  (on   matches, paper,  clubs,  billiard-tables,  receipts,  railroad  transportation), and   made  the   budget   balance,  but   without  making  any  complete fiscal   reform.

The  government  was  attacked  at   once  by   the   Royalist  Right,

which  desired  to   recall  the   King,   and   by   the   Extreme  Left,   which was  dissatisfied  with  seeing   the   Republic  managed  by   men  who had   previously  been  Orleanists.

The  Radical  opposition  was  almost  without  means  of   influence. The  government,  since  the   Commune,  had  left   all   the   large   cities in   a   state  of   siege,   thus   preserving  the   power  of   arbitrarily  suppressing every   newspaper.  As   long   as   the   Assembly  lasted, that   is,   until   1876,   the   press  existed  at   the   mercy  of   the   government. The   speeches   of   Gambetta,  leader  of   the   Extreme  Left, were  the   main  instrument  of   agitation.  He   made  trips   about  the country  demanding  the  dissolution  of   the   Assembly  in   the   name of   the   "   sovereignty  of   the   people."  He   announced  "   the   coming into  politics  of   a   new  social  stratum."  Thiers,  who  had   called Gambetta's  policy  the   policy   of   a  raving   lunatic,  censured  this agitation  in   his   official  capacity.  He   said:  "The  Republic  will be   conservative  or   it   will   cease  to   be."  The  Right   showed  its dissatisfaction  by   interpellations  and   by   contentions  in   favour  of the   temporal  power  of   the   Pope,   by   pilgrimages,  and   by   protestations against   the   Republic.

For  a   year  and   a   half   the   Right   Centre  accepted  the   government of   Thiers  and  aided  it   in   its   work  of   reorganization.  It took  part,   however,  in   defeating  the   educational  reform  proposed by   Jules   Simon  and   in   preventing  the   introduction  of   a   press   law which  would  have  granted  liberty   to   the   newspapers.  Little  by little   it   detached  itself   from   Thiers.

The  disagreement  had  reference  to   domestic  policy  and  the question  of   the   constitution.  Thiers  wished  to   avoid  a   breach with  the  Republicans.  The  Right  Centre  reproached  Thiers with  not  opposing  energetically  the  agitation  of   the  Radical party  and  with  letting  the  Republic  get   consolidated.  It   demanded a   "   fighting  government  "   (un   gouvernement  de   combat). Thiers  wished  to   escap  :   from  the   provisional  situation  by   getting the   Assembly  to   vote  a   constitution  which  should  establish  the Republican  government  definitively.  "   It   is,"   said   he,   "   the   system that   divides  us   least,"   "   the   lawful  government  of   the   country ";   any  other  would  be   "   a   new  revolution."  The   Right   Centre declared  that  the   Bordeaux  agreement  had  established  only   a "   provisional  government,"  and  was  meant  to  reserve  to   the Assembly  the   right   of   choosing  any  other  form  of   government. The  Assembly  agreed  to   elect  a   committee  to   prepare  a   draft   of a   constitution;  but   in   this   committee  of   thirty   the   Right   had   a   majority, and   instead  of   drawing   up   a   draft   of   a   constitution  it   limtry

I

ited   the   powers  of   the   President.  Thiers  had   the   practice  of   taking part   in   the   debates  of   the   Assembly,  where  his   utterances  influenced the   wavering  members.  The  committee  declared against   "   the   personal  intervention  of   the   head  of   the   executive power   in   debates,"  and   the   Assembly  imposed  on   Thiers  as  on  a parliamentary  king   the   formality  of   communicating  by   message, after  the   reading  of   which  the   sitting   should  be   adjourned. Thiers  submitted,  with  a   protest  against   this   "   absurdity."

The  rupture  became  public   in   January,  1873,   by   the   election  of a   member  of   the   Right   Centre,  Buffet,  to   the   presidency  of   the Assembly  instead  of   the   Republican,  Grevy,   hitherto  always   reelected  since  1871.   Two  facts  made  the   rupture  definitive.  The Radical  candidate  (Barodet)  was  elected  deputy  at   Paris  against Thiers'  candidate.  People  drew  from  this  the  conclusion  that Thiers  was  unable  to   prevent  the   victory   of   the   Radicals  (April 27,   1873).  The  ministry  proposed  to   end   the   provisional  situation, which   it   said   favoured  the   Radical  agitation;  it   brought  forward bills   for   organizing  the   public   powers  with   two   Chambers and   a   President.

The  rupture  was  completed  by   an  order  of   the   day   inviting   the President  "   to   enforce  in   the   government  a   resolutely  conservative policy."   This   was  carried  by   360   votes  against   344,   thanks to   the   little   Target   group  which  abandoned  the   government (May   24,   1873).   Thiers,  instead  of   simply   changing  the   ministry while  retaining  the   executive  power,  a   course  which  would  have entailed  a   speedy   dissolution,  resigned  his   office  and   handed  over the   direction  of   affairs  to   the   enemies  of   the   Republic.

The   Government  of   the   Monarchical  Parties  (1873-75). - It   was settled  by   the   vote  of   May   24   that   the   grouping  of   the   parties should  come  about,  not   by   the   union  of   the   Centres,  but   by   the union  of   the   Extremes.  The  coalition  of   all   the   groups  on the   Right   took   possession  of   power  and   kept   it   to   the   end   of   the Assembly,  in   February,  1876.  It   elected  Marshal  MacMahon President,  selected  by   the   Orleanists  to   prepare  the   way   for   the return  of   monarchy;  the   groups  of   the   Left   took   no  part   in   the election.  The  ministry,  like   the   majority,  was  a   coalition  of   three parties,   Orleanist,  Legitimist,  and   Imperialist,  under  an   Orleanist chief,   the   Due   de   Broglie.  This  was  a   "   fighting   government," that   announced  the   purpose  of   re-establishing  "moral  order," destroyed  by   the   Radicals  ; it   was  nicknamed  Moral  Order.

On  three  vital  questions - domestic  policy,  constitution,  and Church  policy  - the   coalition  had   a   common  program,  at   least   of

the   negative  sort.  1st,   Not   to   let   the   Republicans  regain   power; 2d,   Not   to   allow   the   Republic  to   be   officially   established;  3d,   Not to   oppose  the   clergy.  The   ministry  was  thus  united  on  negative measures:

First.  In   the   case  of   all   offices  held   during   pleasure  (prefects and  sub-prefects,  commissioners,  inferior  judges,  district  attorneys), it   dismissed  Republican  "office-holders  and  substituted  Monarchists. The   old   office-holders  of   the   Empire   were  restored  to their  places.  In   order  to   have   complete  control  of   the   administration, the   ministry  obtained  the   adoption  of   the   Taw   of   1874, which  gave   it   the   power  of   appointing  the   mayors   in   all   the   communes (the   law  of   1871   had   kept   only   the   chief  town  in   each canton  subject   to   executive  appointment).  In   order  to   check  the Republican  agitation,  the   government,  using   the   state  of   siege, exercised  strict  supervision  over  the   daily   papers  and   forbade  the sale   of   them   in   public   places.   It   took   advantage  of   the   law   which required  a  prefect's  license  for   drinking  saloons,  by   threatening to   close  every  saloon  where  Republican  politics  were  agitated. It   re-established  in   1874   the   censorship  of   theatres.  In   the   byelections  the   ministry  ordered  civil  servants  to  support  actively the   monarchical  candidate  and  practically  re-established  official candidature.

Second.  As  regards  the  constitution  the  government  prolonged the   discussion  of   various  drafts.  While  this   was  going   on it   had   the   statues  of   the   Republic  removed  from  the   city   halls; in   all   its   official  acts,   and   even  in   proclamations,  it   sedulously avoided  the   use  of   the   word  Republic.

Third.  The  clergy  and  the   Catholic  party   had   full   liberty   of agitation  by   meetings  of   bishops,  writing  in   newspapers,  processions, and   pilgrimages.  The   great   pilgrimage  of   1873   to   Parayle-Monial,  sanctuary  of   the   Sacred  Heart,  under  the   care  of   the Jesuits,  was  a   demonstration  by   the   whole  Catholic  party   in favour  of   the   re-establishment  of   the   temporal  power.  They dreamed  of   restoring  simultaneously  the   King   of   France  and   the Pope-King  of   Rome.  Their  solemn  chant  was   "   Save  Rome  and France  in   the   name  of   the   Sacred  Heart."  The   Assembly  passed an  expropriation  act  to  permit   the   building  on   Montmartre  of the   Church  of   the   Sacred  Heart  on   the   spot   where  St.   Ignatius gathered  his   first   followers;  this   to   typify   the   taking   of   Paris  by the   Jesuits.  In   order  to   aid   the   soldiers  in   their   religious  duties, it   established  the   military  almoners  as  agents  of   Catholic  propagandism  in   the   regiments.  The  prefects  opposed  civil  burials;

the   prefect   of   Lyons   forbade  them  by   day.   The  Catholic  party managed  the  primary  schools  in   the   communes  where  it   controlled the   municipal  council.  It   had   obtained  by   law   in   1850 the   right   of   carrying  on  secondary  instruction  and   it   now  asked for   the   right   of   carrying   on   higher   instruction.  The   Assembly eventually  passed   the   act  of   1875   which  gave  permission  to   found free   universities,  and   established  mixed  boards  of   examiners  for these  universities.

Against  the   Monarchical  coalition  the   three  groups  of   the   Left united  in   a   hard  and   fast   agreement  to   vote  as  one   body   on  all party   questions.  The  Extreme  Left,   led   by   Gambetta,  gave  up temporarily  its   own  policy   and  subordinated  itself  to   the   Left Centre,  which  continued  to   be   the   controlling  group  to   the   end   of the   Assembly.  The  coalition  of   the   Left  had  only   a   defensive policy:   to   save  the   Republic  by   obtaining  a   definitive  constitution and  to   defend  individuals  against  the  fighting  government's stretches  of   power.  The  Right   aspired  to   protect  order  and   society against   the   Radicals  ; the   Left   equally   appealed  to   conservative sentiments  by   upholding  the   Republic,  "   the   lawful  government of   the   people,"  which  only   revolution  could  suppress.

The  Right   controlled  steadily  a  small  but   assured  majority  of 20   to   30   votes  on  all   negative   questions,  but   it   could  take   no  positive step   except   by   compromises  with   the   Left.

First.  In   the   first   place   it   wished  to   establish  monarchy.  The old   division  into   Legitimists  and   Orleanists  had   been  closed  by the   fusion;  all   recognised  the   Legitimist  king,   the   Count  of Chambord,  Henry  V.,   head  and  last  representative  of   the   elder branch  of   the   Bourbons.  His   successor  was  to   be   the   Orleanist candidate,  the   Count  of   Paris,   head  of   the   younger  branch.  The fusion  had   been  officially  confirmed  by   the   visit  of   the   Count  of Paris   to   the   Count  of   Chambord  at   Frohsdorf,  in   Austria,  August, 1873.  During  the  recess  of   the  Assembly  the  groups  of   the Right,   the   Imperialists  holding  aloof,   formed  a   committee  of   nine charged  to   negotiate  with   the   King   the   terms  of   restoration.  On all   substantial  questions  they   were  agreed:   the   Assembly  was  not to   elect   a   King,'but  to   declare  that   Henry   V.had  been  called  to   the throne  as   head   of   the   House  of   France  by   hereditary  right.   The Constitution  should  be,   not   imposed  by   the   King,   but   presented by   the   King   and   voted  by   the   Assembly,  subject   to   the   King's approval.  It   should  guarantee,  like  the   "   Charte  "   of   1814,   a constitutional  system  (annual  vote  of   the   budget,  civil   and   religious liberties,   equality   before  the   law,   etc.).   But   on  a   question

of   symbol  they   could  not  agree.  The  Right   Centre  wished  to announce,  "   the   tricolour  flag   is   maintained."  The  Count  of Chambord  had  declared  himself  several  times  since  1871   in   honour bound  to   keep   the   white  flag,   "   received  as  a   sacred  deposit   from the   old   King,   'his   grandfather,  dying   in   exile,"   and   to   reject   the tricolour,  "   symbol  of   revolution."  It   was  decided  to   postpone the   decision  until   the   restoration.  The   Right   regarded  the   restoration as   certain,   and   was  already   making   preparations  for   the vote  and   for   the   King's   reception,  when  the   letter  of   September  27 arrived:  the   Count  of   Chambord,  learning  from  the   newspapers that  people  in   France  regarded  the   tricolour  as   definitely  accepted, solemnly   declared  that   he   could  not  sacrifice  the   white flag.   The   Right   Centre  had   made  the   tricolour  a   necessary  condition; it   now  abandoned  the   restoration  and   sought  to   consolidate its   own  control  by   prolonging  the   power  of   the   President.  The Assembly  conferred  on   MacMahon  the  Presidency  for   7   years, (the   Right   Centre  had   proposed  10  years,  the   Left  Centre  5). This  law   of   the   Septennate  displeased  the   Legitimist  group,  who hoped  still   to   have   the   recall  of   the   King   adopted - the   Count  of Chambord  having  come  to   Versailles  November  20.  It   was  the Left   Centre  that   secured  the   passage  of   the   Septennate  in   order  to escape  the   restoration  of   monarchy.

Second.  The  Orleanist  party,  already  in   possession  of   the   executive power   through   the   President,  attempted  to   gain   possession of   the   Chambers  for   the   future.  It   proposed  an  election  law similar  to  that  of   May   31,   1850,   by   demanding  three  years' residence  as  a  qualification  for   voting,  and   to   create  a   Grand Council  appointed  by   the   President  of   the   Republic.  The  Extreme Right,   fearing   an   Orleanist  restoration,  voted  with  the groups  of   the   Left   and   defeated  the   ministry,  May   16,   1874.   The new  ministry  (Cissey)  was  again   a   coalition  of   the   three  monarchical parties,   but   dominated  by   Bonapartist  ministers,  who   governed in   such  way  as   to   strengthen  their  own  party.  The   byelections  enlarged  the   group  advocating  appeal  to   the   people; there  was  an   impression  that  the   Imperialist  party  was  rapidly growing,  and  that  at   a   general   election  there  would  be   only   two parties,   Republican  and   Imperialist  (of   29   elections  between  May, 1873,   and   January,  1875,   the   Republicans  won  23,   the   Imperialists   6).   The   Assembly  unearthed  a   committee  of   appeal   to   the   people, organized  to   manage  the   Imperial  agitation  and   acting   in secret  harmony  with  the   ministers  (1874).  Certain  members  of the  Right   Centre,  strongly  opposed  to  the  Empire,  made  an

## GOVERNMENT  OF   THE  MONARCHICAL  PARTIES.        201

t   nderstanding  with  the   Left   and   brought  to   an  end   the   debates en  the   Lois   Const   itutionelles,  which  had   dragged  along   for   a   year and   a   half   (June,   1875).   The   ministry,  defeated  as  early   as   January, 1875,   by   a   coalition  of   the   Left   and   the   Legitimists,  had   remained in   office  two  months  longer.

Fourth.  The  agreement  between  the   Right   and   the   Right   Centre was   broken  over  the   question  of   the   organization  of   powers. The  Legitimists  would  recognise  only   a  personal  authority  in MacMahon,  which  he   might   lay   aside  at   any  moment  by   giving place   to   the   legitimate  king.   The   Right   Centre  held   the   Septennate  to   be   independent  of   the   person  of   the   President;  to   be   at once  provisional  and   yet   beyond   the   reach  of   attack.  At   the   end of   the   seven  years   the   Chamber  should  regain   the   right   of   dealing with  the   constitution;  they   hoped   to   transfer  the   power  to   the Due  d'Aumale.  By   the   rupture  the   Monarchist  coalition  lost   its power  of   determining  at   will   the   form  of   government  for   France. The  Assembly  rejected  the   proposition  of   the   Left,   declaring  that "   the   government  of   the   Republic  consists  of   two   Chambers  and   a President  "  ; but   as  some  solution  was  a   necessity,  a   small  group, deserting  the   Right   Centre,  joined   the   Left   and   carried,  by   a   majority of   one,  the   amendment  offered  by   Wallon,  which,  by   giving to   the   executive  the   title   President  of   the   Republic,   recognised by   implication  the  Republic  as  the  definitive  government  of France  (January  30,   1875).

Fifth.  Then  provision  was  made  for   a   Senate.  The  Orleanist party   was  unable  to   carry   the   appointment  of   the   Senators  by the   President;  but   it   succeeded  in   defeating  the   proposition  of   the Left,   that   they   should  be   elected  by   universal  suffrage.  It   further obtained  a   decision  that   seventy-five  of   its   members  should  be elected  for   life   by   the   Assembly.  The   Left   Centre  proposed  to the   Right   Centre  an  agreement  as   to   the   members  to   be   elected; it   asked  for   the   Left   only   thirty   of   the   seventy-five;  the   Right Centre  was  not  willing  to  grant  more  than  thirteen.  But  the Imperialist  party,   fearing   the   preponderance  of   the   Orleanists,  refused to   vote  for   their   candidates.  On   the   second  day   of   the   voting they   came  to   an  understanding  with   the   Left:  they   detached fifteen   chevaulegers  (Legitimists)  from  the   majority  by   offering them  seats  in   the   Senate.  This  coalition  succeeded  in   electing fifty-eight  of   the   seventy-five  senators  from  the   Left,   with  nine Legitimists,  against  eight   candidates  of   the   Right.  The  Buffet ministry,  formed  March,  1875,   by   understanding  between  the   two Centres,  still   held   office  in   opposition  to   the   Republicans.

The  Constitution  of   1875. - The  system  established  by   the Assembly  in   1875   was  the   result  of   a   compromise,  as   no   majority could  be   found  to   support  any  complete  constitution.  To   speak accurately,  there  is   no  constitution  of   1875   in   the   sense  of   the previous  French  constitutions.  We  use  the   word,  however,  of the   Septennate  law   of   1873   and   the   three  lois   constitutionellcs  of 1875   taken  together,  and   completed  by   various  organic  laws   relative to   the   election  of   senators  and   representatives.  These  must still   be   interpreted  by   means  of   the   two   laws   of   1871   and   1873 which  had   regulated  the   powers  of   Thiers.

The  whole  organization  is   that   of   a   constitutional  monarchy  on the   Belgian  model.  The  President  of   the   Republic,  elected  for seven  years,   holds  the   position  of   a   constitutional  King;   he   has the   same  powers,  even  the   right   of   pardon,   and   he   is   similarly   forbidden to   exercise  any  of   them  in   person.  All   his   public   acts must  be   performed  through  ministers;  he   is   personally  irresponsible; he   has   the   right   of   dissolving  the   Chamber,  but   only with   the   approval   of   the   Senate.

The  ministers,  who  exercise  the   real   power,   form,   as   in   England, a   ministry  united  and   responsible  in   presence  of   the   Chambers. That   which  in   England   is   only   usage,   is   in   France  written as   a   formal  rule   of   the   constitution,  and   the   position   of   head   of the   council,  which  in   England  exists  only   as  a   fact,   has   a   similar recognition.  Responsibility,  as   in   all   parliamentary  countries, implies  the   power  of   the   Chambers,  not  only   to   judge   the   ministers, but   to   compel   them   to   resign   by   a   simple   vote.* bers.

As   this   power  cannot  be   practically  exercised  by   two   Chambers at   once  it   is   considered  as  reserved  exclusively  for   the   lower house.  This  is   the   interpretation  which  has   prevailed  in   France, even  after  the   conflict  of   1896.   Sovereignty  is   thus  indirectly exercised  by   the   lower  house,  which  controls  the   fate  of   the ministers.

The  ministers  are  appointed  by   the   President;  the   law   of   1871

*   The   law   does  not  explain   whether  the   word  responsible  is   to   be   taken in   its   old   legal   sense  or   in   its   new  political  sense.  Responsibility  in   the old   sense  was  enforced  by   the   judicial  process  of   impeachment.  Political responsibility,  on   the   other  hand,   is   enforced  by   a   simple   vote  of   the   representative Chamber.  The   Assembly  of   1875   admitted  at   once  both  sorts of   responsibility,  but   in   designating  both  by   a  single   word  it   confounded them  together  in   one  phrase  :   "   The  ministers  are  responsible  in   presence of   the   Chambers,"  using   the   plural,   which  applies   well  to   the   case  where ministers  are   impeached  by   one  Chamber  before  the   other,  but   not  to   the case  where  they   are  simply   defeated  in   the   popular  Chamber.

even  says   that  they   are   dismissed  by   him;   but  parliamentary usage   does  not  permit  him  to   appoint  them  outside  the   parliamentary majority,   nor   to   use   the   right   of   dismissal;  they   leave office  only   by   resignation.  As   no  process   is   indicated  for   determining when   ministers  must  resign,   they   themselves  must  decide the   matter.  In   practice,  the   ministers  have  shown  themselves very  respectful  to   the   Chamber  and   have  resigned  as  soon  as   they have  been  left   in   minority,  without  waiting   for   a   vote  of   want  of confidence.  Of   the   provisional  scheme  established  for   Thiers  in 1871,   a   scrap   has   been  preserved  which  is   contrary  to   the   usage of   parliamentary  countries,  namely,  the   right   of   the   President  of the   Republic  to   preside   in   the   Council  df   Ministers.*

The  legislative  power   in   its   most  extended  sense,   including  the right   to   vote  war,  peace,  treaties,  to   interpellate  the   ministers,  the right   of   inquest,  the   right   of   initiative  for   every  member,  is shared  by   two  assemblies:  a   Chamber  of   Deputies,  elected  by universal  suffrage,  and  renewed  as  a   body   every   four  years;  a Senate  of   300  members,  one-fourth  elected  for  life  by   the Assembly,  vacancies  in   the   list   of   life   members  to   be   rilled  by   the Senate  itself;   three-fourths  to   consist  of   members  elected  for   nine years   by   electoral  colleges  in   the   departments.  In   these  colleges delegates  from  the   municipal  councils,  one  for   each  commune, were  the   preponderating  element.f

The  Right  Centre,  in   giving   up   the   appointment  of   senators by   the   President,  had   insisted  on  equal   representation  of   all   the communes  in   the  electoral  colleges,  in   order  to   insure  the   predominance of   the   little   country  communes.  The  law   attributes exactly  the   same  powers  to   the   two   Chambers,  except  that  the budget  must  be   voted  in   the   first   instance  by   the   Chamber,  and the   Senate  has   the   right   of   voting   the   dissolution  of   the   Chamber on   the   request  of   the   President;  also   the   right   to   sit   as   a   court  of justice   for   trial   of   political   offenders.  The  Chambers  have  a legal   right   to   one  session  of   five   months  yearly;   the   President

*   The   French  ministers  meet  for   confidential  conference  in   conseil  du cabinet,  without  the  presence  of   the  President  of   the   Republic;  but   for formal  action  as  a  conseil  des  ministres  they   need  the  President  of   the Republic  in   the  chair.  The  two  forms  of   meeting  are  not  essentially  diferent  from  the  two  forms  of   meeting  used  by   the   English  Ministers;  first, when  they   meet  for   consultation  as  a   Cabinet  without  the   sovereign  ;   and, secondly,  when  they   meet  for   formal  action  as  a   Privy   Council,  in   presence of   the   sovereign.  The  meeting  for   formal  action  is   in   both  countries recognised  by   the   law.  See  ESMEIN,  Droit  Constitutionel,  p.   615.- TR.

\ The  senatorial  elections  were  materially  changed  in   1884   (see   p.   209).

## 204  THE  PARLIAMENTARY  REPUBLIC.

may   adjourn  them  for   the   rest  of   the   year,  and   during   their   recess he   stands  alone.  The   right   of   setting   up   a   permanent  committee by   his   side   was  abandoned.

The  Council  of   State  is   simply   a   body   of   officers  designated  by the   government.

The  meeting  of   the   two   Chambers  constitutes  the   National Assembly,  which  alone  is   sovereign.  This  elects  the   President and  has   the   power  of   revising  the   constitution;  but   the   revision can  be   undertaken  only   after  a  separate  vote  of   each   Chamber agreeing  to   hold  the   joint   meeting.

Of   the   English   Parliamentary  system,  the   French  have   thus preserved  the   three  powers,  the   irresponsible  sovereign,  the   united and  responsible  ministry,  the   right   of   dissolution  and   the   two houses;  but   to   these  they   have  added  democratic  innovations: 1st,   The   sovereign  is   elected,  and   for   a   limited  term:   he   has   not the   full   power  of   dissolution.  2d,   The   upper   house  is   elected and   is   not   confined  to   the   mere  passage  of   bills.  3d,   The   lower house  is   elected  by   universal  suffrage.  4th,   The   members  of the   houses  receive  pay   for   their   services,  and   the   senatorial  electors receive  travelling  expenses.  This   is   a   compromise  between the   English   Parliamentary  monarchy  and   the   democratic  system adopted  for   France  by   the   Convention  (1793).  In   practice   it   has leaned  more  to   the   democratic  system.  The   Chamber,  elected  by universal  suffrage,  has   become  the   dominant  power,  because  it controls  the   ministry.  The  President  has   confined  his   personal role   to   representing  the   government  on  ceremonial  occasions,  to designating*  the   head  of   each  ministry,  and   to   presiding  at   the Council  of   Ministers.  The   Senate  has   made  little   use  of   its   right of   initiative;  it   has   rarely   proposed   laws,   and   has   confined  itself to   a   right   of   veto  on   bills   proposed   by   the   Chamber.  It   has adopted  the   practice  of   accepting,  without  serious  changes,  the budget  prepared  by   the   Chamber,  contenting  itself  with  preventing the   suppression  of   public   services  by   mere  action  on  the budget.  Thus  has  been  established  the   political  constitution which  France  had  vainly   been  striving  for   since  1789.   There are  now  recognised  in   France  principles  of   government  which  no party  any   longer   contests:  the   sovereignty  of   the   nation  exercised through   the   Chamber,  universal  suffrage,  liberty   of   the press,  trial  by   jury,   and   right   of   public   meeting.  Under  this political   constitution  the   social  organization  created  by   the   Revolution, and   the   administrative  system  created  by   Napoleon  are both  preserved.

## STRUGGLE  BETWEEN  PRESIDENT  AND   CHAMBER.      205

Struggle  between  the   President  and   the   Chamber  (1876-79).President  MacMahon,  elected  by   the   Monarchist  Right,   thought himself  bound  in   honour  to   govern  according  to   the   ideas  of   the Right.  The  Chamber,  elected  by   universal  suffrage,  had   a   large majority  of   Republicans, - 360   against  170,  - the   Senate,  elected before  the   Chamber,  by   the   electoral  colleges  of   the   departments, in   Which  the   municipal  councils  of   the   country  communes  had   the control,  was  at   first   about  equally   divided  (thanks  to   the   Republican majority   of   life   senators  elected  by   the   Assembly);  later   the Right   had   a   majority   of   a   few   votes.  The   grouping  'of   the   parties, formed  in   1873   on   the   question  of   the   Republic,  continued;  but the   parties   had   changed  their  attitude.  The  Republican  party, divided  into   three  groups, - Left  Centre,  Republican  Left  (most numerous),  and  Radical  Left,  - took  the   offensive  to   compel  the President  to   adopt   a   Republican  policy.  The  old   monarchical party,  now  become  the   conservative  party,  was  thrown  on  the   defensive. It   was   in   three   groups  : Right,   Right   Centre,  and   Popular Appeal   (the   Extreme  Right   had   disappeared).  Unable  now to   dispute   the   constitution,  these  groups  sought,   in   the   name  of the   interests  of   society,   to   keep   conservative  office-holders  in   their places  - the   thing   called  "   the   Republic  without  Republicans."

As   to   the   civil   services,  the   Left   demanded  a   purge,  that   is   to say,   the   dismissal  of   office-holders  openly   hostile  to   the   Republic. The  ministry  effected  this   more  or   less   completely.

The  question  of   the   constitution  being   finally   settled,  the   contest turned  on   the   possession  of   power,  the   guarantees  of   public liberty,   and   the   policy   toward  the   Church.  The  Left  began   by asking  for   a   Republican  ministry.  'MacMahon  accepted  a'ministry   of   the   Left   Centre  (Dufaure  in   March,  1876,   and   later  in   the year   Jules   Simon);  but   he   held  three  ministerial  offices - War, Navy,   and   Foreign  Affairs - to   be   outside  of   politics.

In   order  to   establish  freedom  of   elections  the   Chamber  condemned official   candidatures  by   systematically  refusing   to   admit deputies  elected  by   the   help   of   the   office-holders  or   the   clergy.   It re-established  freedom  of   the   press  and   the   right   to   sell   newspapers in   public.  It   passed  the   Act   of   1876,   which  restored  to the   municipal  councils,  except   in   the   case  of   the   chief  town  of each  canton,  the   right   of   electing  the   mayor.  The   clergy   had canvassed  against  the   Republicans;  the   Left  declared  itself  opposed to   the   influence  of   the   clergy.   The   ministry  prepared  bills to   exclude  members  of   religious  orders  from  teaching  in   the   primary schools  and   to   withdraw  from   the   Catholic  universities  the   ^

## 2o6  THE  PARLIAMENTARY  REPUBLIC.

right   of   preparing  students  for   the   state  examinations.  The Chamber  refused  to  vote  money  for   the   military  almoners  (see p.   198).   The   Catholic  party   drew  up   a   petition  to   the   President of   the   Republic,  asking   him   to   support  the   Pope   against Italy,   with   the   object   of   re-establishing  the   temporal   power.   The Cha'mber  replied  by   a   resolution  against   the   ultramontane  agitation (May   4,   1877).   This   was   the   occasion  of   the   rupture  with the   President.

MacMahon,  while  accepting  Republican  ministers,  continued to   consult  his   political   friends,   his   former  ministers,  leaders  of the   Conservative  party.   They   persuaded  him  to   rid   himself  of the   Republican  Chamber  before  the   autumn  municipal  elections, upon  the   outcome  of   which  depended  the   approaching  renewal of   the   Senate.  MacMahon  dismissed  the   Simon  ministry  (May 16),   took  a   Conservative  ministry  (Broglie-Fourtou),  adjourned the   Chamber  for   a   month,  then  dissolved  it   with  the   consent  of the   Senate.

May   16   meant  political  war   between  the   President  and   Senate on   the   one   hand,   and   the   Republican  power,  the   Chamber,  on   the other.  The  constitution  placed  the   Chamber  and  the   ministry at   the   discretion  of   the   President  and   Senate,  and   the   Conservative party   took   advantage  of   this   to   regain   power.  In   order  to keep   office  as   long   as  possible  the   ministry  extended  by   three weeks  the  period  within  which  the  constitution  required  the electors  to   meet,  and   thus   got   for   itself   five   months  of   power.  It used  these  five   months  in   preparing  for   the   elections;  it   changed at   a   stroke  the   whole  administrative  body,   and   appointed  new "fighting  officials";  it   embarrassed  by   prohibitions  or  prosecutions the   sale   of   Republican  journals,  political  meetings,  and agitation  for   the   Republic;  it   suspended  Republican  municipal councils,  substituting  for   them  municipal  commissioners.  At the   elections  it   presented  official  candidates,  indorsed  by   the President  of   the   Republic,  and  published  Presidential  manifestoes to   the   French  people.  In   these  MacMahon,  abandoning his   role   of   the   irresponsible  sovereign,  assumed  officially  a position  opposed  to   the   Republicans  and  announced  his   purpose " to   fight   it   out   to   the   last,"   even  against   the   will   of   the   voters. The   clergy   supported  the   official  candidates,  and   preached  against the   Republicans.

The   Left,   thrown  on   the   defensive  anew,  'forgot   its   differences and   drew  together  as  a   homogeneous  party.  All   the   deputies who   supported  the   vote  of   May   16   (the   363)   presented  themselves

## SUPREMACY  AND  CHANGES  OF  REPUBLICAN  PARTY.      207

with  a  common  platform.  The  Republican  senators  chose  a committee  for   common  action.  Their  cue  was  to  pose  as  conservatives, as   defenders  of   the   Republic  against   the   revolutionary coalition  of   monarchists  and   clergy  - as   defenders  of   the   sovereignty of   the   people   against   the   personal  power  of   the   President. Gambetta  launched  two  famous  phrases:  "   Our  foe   is   clericalism "   (Le   clericalisme  voila  1'ennemi),  "   When  the   country  shall have  spoken,  he   must  either  submit  or  resign   "   (Quand  le   pays aura  parle,   il   faudra  se  soumettre  ou  se   demettre).  The  Republicans also   used   with   the   voters  the   fear   of   war  with   Italy,   urged by   the   Catholic  supporters  of   the   temporal  power.

The  elections  of   October,  1877,   returned  about  330   Republicans against  210   Conservatives.  The  ministry  resigned.  The  Conservative party   hesitated  as   to   its   future   course.  The   President tried  a   "   business  ministry  "   (Rodiebouet),  chosen  outside  of   the Chambers,  but   within  the   Conservative  party.  The  Chamber  declined to   recognise   this   ministry   (November  24).   The   Senate did   not   dare   to   approve  a   second  dissolution;  the   budget   had   not been  voted  and,   in   order  to   do   without  the   Chamber,  it   would have  been  necessary  to   levy   taxes  without  legal   authority,  and   to use   force  against   citizens  who  should  resist.  There  were  Conservatives ready   to   form  a   ministry  with   this   program,  but   MacMahon  would  have  no  coup   d'etat,  preferring  to  submit.  He formed  a   ministry  of   the   Left   Centre,  wholly   Republican  (December, 1877).   This   was  the   final   overthrow  of   the   Conservative party.

The  Republicans  resumed  power.  The  ministry  restored  the office-holders  dismissed  by   the  ministry  of   May   16,   and  the Chamber  quashed  more  than  50   elections  made  under  administrative or   clerical  pressure.  The  elections  to   fill   these  vacancies brought  up   the   number  of   Republicans  to   370.   The  party  was still   united;   the   exposition  of   1878   was   distracting  attention  from politics.  Gambetta  advised  the   Radicals  to   cultivate  union,  discipline, and   patience,   saying   that   they   must  settle   questions  one by   one   (December,  1878).  Finally,  at   the   renewal  of   one-third  of the   Sena'te,  the   Republicans  acquired  a   strong  majority  in   that body   (178   against  126).   MacMahon,  isolated  and  reluctant  to make  certain  army  appointments  asked  for   by   his   Republican ministers,  handed  in   his   resignation  and  was  followed  by   a Radical,  Grevy   (January,  1879).  The   Republicans  thus  acquired, and   have   retained,  control  of   the   three  organs  of   political   power.

Supremacy  and  Changes  of   the   Eepublican  Party   (1879-84).-

The  Republicans,  united  for   defence,  fell   apart  again   when  it came  to   governing.  The  Left  Centre  had   had   the   power   because it   could  get   on  with   MacMahon,  but   it   was  weak  with  the   electors. From   this   time   forward  it   was  only   an   insignificant  group in   the   Chamber.  Its   strength  lay   in   the   Senate,  where,   by   uniting with  the   Right,   it   formed  until  1882  a   Catholic  majority,  which defeated  the   measures  of   the   Chamber  against   the   clergy.  In   the Chamber  the   majority  belonged  to  two  groups,  the   Republican Left  and  the   former  Extreme  Left  (Gambetta's  party,  now  become the   Republican  Union).  But  a  new  Extreme  Left  was formed,  which  reproached  Gambetta  and  his   followers  with  abandoning Radical  principles  for   a  policy   of   opportunism.  The majority  began  by   ousting  the   Dufaure  ministry  (Left   Centre) because  it   refused  to   dismiss  all   Monarchists  from  office.  Power passed   to   the   Left,   which  formed  several  ministries  in   succession, each  made  up   more  largely   from  the   Extreme  Left   than  its   predecessor (Waddington,  January,  1880;  Freycinet,  December, 1880;   Ferry,   1881).

The  government  carried  the   transfer  of   the   Chambers  from Versailles  to   Paris  (June,   1880)   and   the   institution  of   the   National Festival  of   July   14.   It   announced  a   series  of   projects:  some  to realize  a   part   of   the   old   radical  program  : freedom  of   the   press  and of   public   meeting,  universal  election  of   the   mayors   by   the   municipal councils,   purchase   of   all   railways   by   the   State,   and   above all   free  and  compulsory  primary  education  by   lay   teachers. Other  measures  were  directed  against  the   Catholic  party :   to   withdraw the   corporate  quality   from  bishoprics,  to   suppress  Church cemeteries,  to   abolish  the   military  almoners,  to   deprive   the   Catholic universities  of   the   name  "   university  "   and   the   right   of   presenting for   degrees.   In   proposing  the   bill   regulating  higher education,  the   Minister  of   Instruction  (Ferry)   added  the   famous Article  7,   which  forbade  members  of   unauthorized  religious orders  to   take  part   in   secondary  education - the   object   being   to destroy  the   Jesuit   colleges.

The  positive  measures  encountered  the   passive  resistance  of the   Senate,  where  the   Left   Centre,  in   alliance  with   the   Conservatives, defeated   the   bills   passed   by   the   Chamber.  It   accepted  only the   bill   relating   to   the   Catholic  universities,  without  Article  7 (March,  1880).  The  government  replied  by   issuing  decrees which  called  out  of   abeyance  certain  old   unrepealed  laws   against "   unauthorized  congregations,"  and  ordered  all   such  bodies  to disperse.  The  congregations  refused  to  obey,   and   the   govern-

rnent  expelled  them  by   force.  This  was  the   final   breach  between the   Republic  and   the   Catholic  clergy.

The  resistance  of   the   Right   grew  weaker  with  the   progress  of time;   the   government  bills   were  eventually  passed,  some  of   them bit   by   bit:   the   law   as   to   election  of   the   mayors   in   1882,   that making  the   sessions  of   municipal  councils  public   in   1884.   Primary education  was  regulated  by   a   series  of   acts  passed   between 1881  and   1886:  the   act   making   education  gratuitous  in   1881,   that making  it   compulsory  and   by   lay   teachers  in   1882.  Secondary education  for   girls   had   been  regula'ted  by   an  act  of   1880.  A   law of   1881   established  complete  freedom  of   the   press,  without  restrictions in   the   form  of   money   deposit,  license,  or  stamp   duty,   and with  jury   trial  for   all   press  offences;  this  was  the  system demanded  by   the  Radical  party.  Complete  liberty  of   public meeting  was  established,  but   not   liberty   of   political  clubs.  In 1884   the   law   on  professional  syndicates  at   last   secured  to   workingmen  the   right   to   found  societies  like   the   English   trade  unions. At   the   same  time  the   ministers  were  struggling  against  the Extreme  Left  in   its   demands  for   the   dismissal  of   non-Republican judges,   for   amnesty  for   the   Communards,  and   for   amendment  of the   constitution.  But  this  opposition  grew  steadily  stronger; the   ministers  yielded  little  by   little.  In   1880  they   voted  the amnesty  (preceded  by   individual  pardons  *)   which  permitted  the return  to   France  of   proscribed  Communists  and   gave   the   revolutionary Socialists  a   chance  to   organize   themselves  as  a   party   once more.  In   1882  the   dismissal  of   judges   was   brought  about  by a   law   which  suspended  the  irremovability  of   judges  for   six months,  and  thus  allowed  the   government  to   retire  Conservative magistrates.  Then  'the   government  proposed  a   partial   revision  of the   constitution,  to   which  the   Senate  eventually  agreed   (1884). The  75   life   senatorships  were  to   be   abolished:  as  vacancies should  occur  in   the   list   they   were  to   be   rilled  by   the   election  of ordinary  senators,  with  nine-year  terms - the   election  to   be   by the   departments.  The  number  of   senatorial  electors  in   each department  was   increased  by   assigning  to   each  municipal  council a   number  of   delegates  varying  from  I   to   24,   according4  to   the population  of   the   commune.  This  diminished  the  inequality of   representation  in   these  elections.  It   still   left,   however,  an advantage  in   the   hands  of   the   rural  communes. 14

*   According  to   French  practice,  executive  pardon  (grace)  simply  remits the   active  punishment  of   the   offender,  without  restoring  him  to   his   rights as   a   citizen.  For   this   latter  a   legislative  act   of   amnesty  is   necessary. - TR.

After  the   elections  of   1881   the   Chamber  had   457   Republicans against  88   Conservatives.  In   the   Senate,  after  the   renewal  of 1882,  there  were  205   Republicans  (30   belonging  to  the  Left Centre)  against  95   Conservatives.  The  Conservative  party  gave up   the   political  contest.*  The  Republican  party  underwent  a change,  the   majority  joining   the   Republican  Union.  Gambetta, leader  of   the   majority,  agreed   to   take   charge   of   the   government and  formed  "   the   great   ministry/'  which  had   been  long   expected as   the   incarnation  of   the   Republican  party   (November,  1881). But   instead  of   inviting   all   the   chiefs  of   the   Left   to   join   him,   Gambetta formed  his   ministry   of   men  of   his   own  group  exclusively. He  then  proposed  to   amend  the   constitutional  laws  by   inserting a   clause  requiring  the   Chamber  to   be   elected  by   general   ticket; the   electoral  system  had  been  kept   out  of   the   constitution  in order  that  it   might   be   modified  at   any   time  by   ordinary  law. The  Republican  party   divided.  The  Extreme  Left  had   long   upbraided Gambetta  for   his   opportunist  policy   (he   had,   during   the campaign  of   1881,   made  a   violent  attack  upon   his   adversaries,  in his   district  of   Belleville).  The  Left  reproached  him  with  his kingly   airs,  - referring  to   his   triumphal  entry   into   his   native  town, Cahors, - with  his   authoritative  language  (his   "   speech   from  the throne  "   to   the   Chamber),  and   his   tendency  to   surround  'himself with  his   personal  devotees.  The  malcontents  joined  forces against  him  and  defeated  his   revision  scheme  of   general  ticket by   a   large   majority.  Gambetta  resigned,  having   lost   his   popularity in   three  months  (January,  1882);  he   died  in   December, 1882,   without  having   regained  it.

Once  more  the  government  fell  into  the   hands  of   ministries of   the   Left  supported  by   the   Republican  Union:  Freycinet, then  Duclerc,  and  lastly   Ferry,   the   longest-lived  ministry  of   the Parliamentary  Republic  (February,  1883,   to   May,   1885).  The Radical  party  on  attaining  power  had  abandoned  its  great reforms.  Instead  of   the   election  of   judges   (voted   as  one  of   its principles  in   1883)   it   limited  itself   to   a   purging   process.  Instead of   state  purchase  of   railroads  it   made  "   deals   "   with  the   large companies  (1883).  It   abandoned  the   income  tax  which  it   had demanded  in   1874.  Of   its   former  platform  it   preserved  only   the

*   Since  the   death  of   the   Prince  Imperial,  killed  by   the   Zulus  in   1879,   the Imperialists  had  been  divided  :   the   supporters  of   the   direct  heir,   Prince Jerome,  and  the  supporters  of   his  son  Prince  Victor,  the  latter  being favoured  by   the   Empress  and  the   Catholics.

reform  of   primary  instruction  (accomplished  in   1886),   and  the reform  of   the   military   service,   which  the   Senate  rejected.  It   concentrated its   efforts  on   its   colonial  policy.  It   strove  to   give France  once  more  an  empire  outside  of   Europe  (Tunis,  Soudan, Congo,  Tonquin,  and  Annam)  in   order  to   open  up   markets  for French  commerce.

Division  of   the   Republican  Party   and  Reconstitution  of   the Conservative  Party  (1884-87). - The  Republican  party  at   last broke  into  two  hostile  factions.  The  Left  and  the   Republican Union  formed  the   Republican  party,  supporting  the   government. They   were  known  as   the   Opportunists.  The  Extreme  Left,   taking the   old   name,   formerly   common  to   all   Republicans,  became the   Radical  party.  The  two  parties  were  divided  by   personal rivalries  rather  than  by   a   difference  in   principles.  The   Radicals were  those  who,   having  taken  no  part   in   Gambetta's  personal following  and  having  opposed  Ferry's  colonial  policy,   had   been shut  out  of   the   government.  But  in   resuming  the   portions  of the   old   Radical  platform  which  the   Republicans  had  dropped when  they   attained  power,  the  Radicals  gave  themselves  a "   fighting   platform."  They   demanded  revision  of   the   constitution in   order  to   deprive  the   Senate  of   the   right   of   voting   the budget   and   dissolving  the   Chamber;  the   separation  of   Church  and State,   and   the   abolition  of   the   Concordat,  now   defended  by   the Opportunists ;   reform  of   the   fiscal  system   by   an   income  tax ;   war on   the   large   companies.  (Nothing  more  was   heard  of   the   election of   judges   nor  of   the   suppression  of   standing  armies,  inscribed in   Gambetta's  program  of   1869.)   The  Radicals  added  the   giving up   of   colonial  expeditions.

The  two  parties  were  agreed  regarding  divorce  (which  was made  lawful  in   1884),   on  the   general-ticket  system   (established by   law   in   1885   *),   and   on   the   three-year  military   service  with   the abolition  of   drawing  lots,   of   the   one-year  volunteer  privilege  and of   exemptions  for   teachers  and  clergymen.  The  military  law, however,  was  delayed  by   the   Senate  and  was  not  carried  until 1889.

## The  main  point   of   dispute   was   Tonquin.     Ferry   declared  war

*The  loisur  le   scruttn  de   liste   of   1885   required  each  department  to   elect its   deputies  by   general  vote  of   the  whole  department.  Seven  departments had   ten   or   more  deputies;  the   Nord  had   twenty,  the   Seine  thirtyeight.  France  has  changed  her  system  six   times  since  1848:  1848,   general ticket;   1852,  single-member  districts;  1871,  general  ticket;  1875,  singlemember  districts;  1885,   general  ticket;  1889,   single-member  districts. - TR.

on  the   Radicals  by   saying:   "   Our   danger   is   on  the   left."  The Radicals  profited  by   the   panic   caused  by   the   exaggerated  news of   a   defeat  in   Tonquin  to   induce  the   Chamber  to   vote  against the   Ferry   ministry  (May,   1885).  This  was  the   last   ministry  supported by   a   compact  majority.  Until  1889   there  were  no  more coalition  ministries.

The  Left,   during   its   rule,   had   abandoned  the   financial  policy of   the   Conservative  party:   balanced  budgets,  gradual  liquidation of   the   debt,   and   economy  in   expenditure.  For   the   new  railroads (the   Freycinet  scheme),  school  buildings,  and  colonial  expeditions, it   had  incurred  outlays  which  increased  the  debt  and caused  a  yearly  deficit.  People  were  accustomed  to  see  the budget  estimates  exceeded  by   the   actual  revenue;  the   commercial crisis  which  began   in   1882,   after  the   crash  of   the   General  Union, brought  a  contrary  result.  The  bad  state  of   the   finances  furnished an   additional  argument  against   the   Opportunists.

In   the   electoral  campaign  of   1885   the   government  had   against it   two  oppositions:  the   Radical  Left,   whose  leader  was  Clemenceau,  and  the   Conservative  and  Catholic  Right   which,  without attacking  the   Republic,  avowed  itself  in   opposition  to   the   constitution. Since   the   death   of   the   Count   of   Chambord  in   1883   the Legitimists  had  united  with  the   Orleanist  party,  except  a   small group  of   irreconcilables,  who  transferred  their  homage  to  the Spanish  branch  of   the   Bourbons.  From  both  sides  the   Opportunists were  censured  for   the   Tonquin  war,   the   deficit,   and   the commercial  crisis.

These  were  the  conditions  under  which  the   general  election of   October,  1885,   was   held,   the   first   by   general   ticket  since  1871. Republican  candidates  were  presented  on  two  rival  tickets,  Republican  and  Radical,  which  divided  the   party  votes  and  prevented their   getting   majorities.  The   Conservatives  presented themselves  as  a  single   party.  The  general-ticket  system  was advantageous  to   the   Conservatives,  their  voters  being   distributed in   more  compact  groups.  The  government  lost  seats.  At   the regular  elections  more  Conservatives  than  Republicans  were  successful. At   the   subsequent  elections,  in   the   cases  where  no  candidate had   received  a   majority   at   the   first   balloting,   the   alarmed Republicans  restored  party   discipline,  all   voting   for   a   combined ticket  made  up   of   those  candidates  that   polled   the   largest   vote  at the   first   ballot.  The   Chamber  was  composed  of   382   Republicans and  202   Conservatives  (reduced  to   180   by   the   quashing  of   elections). A   new  generation  of   Conservatives  had  just   entered

political   life   with   a   negative   program  of   Liberal  opposition.  The division  was  almost  wholly  local;  the   whole  east  and  south  had elected  Republicans,  the  west  and  north  Conservatives.  The Republican  party,   divided  into  two  nearly   equal   sets,   Opportunist and   Radical,   had   for   practical   purposes  no  majority.  In   order to   rule,   two   lines   of   policy   were  attempted.  The   one  consisted in   combining  the   two  sets  of   Republicans  against   the   Right;   this was  the   "   policy   of   Republican  concentration,"  formulated  even before  the   elections  by   the   Brisson  ministry,  which  had   followed Ferry.  This  policy   was  adopted  by   the   first   ministries  after  the elections  (Freycinet,  January,  1886;  Goblet,  December,  1886). The  other  policy   consisted  in   getting   the   Conservatives  to   support the   ministerial  Republicans  against   the   Radicals;  this   was the   "   policy   of   conciliation,"  so  named  because  it   implied   an  end of   the   war  upon   the   Conservatives  and   the   clergy.  It   was  tried by   the   Rouvier  ministry  (May,   1887)   and  given   up   after  the resignation  of   Grevy   (December,  1887). port

The  concentration  ministry  demanded  the  expulsion  of   the "   pretenders."  The  Chamber  had   refused  this   in   1883,   but   voted it   in   1886.  The   object   was  to   strike  at   the   Count  of   Paris,   who was  accused  of   having   posed   as  a   sovereign  at   the   marriage  of his   daughter.

The  ministers,  aiming  to   retain  office,   abandoned  all   schemes of   positive  reform.  Their  program  was  limited  to  settling  up the   colonial  enterprises  (the   Tonquin  appropriations  had  been carried  by   a   majority  of   only   a   few   votes)   and   to   restoring  the balance  in   the   budget.  The  Chamber  overturned  the  Goblet ministry  for   not   having   proposed  sufficient  reductions  of   expense (May,  1887).

The  Boulanger  Crisis  (1887-89).- The  Radicals  had  allied themselves,  against  Ferry,   with  the   patriots,   who   disliked  colonial expeditions  because  they   diverted  France  from  the   war  of   revenge against   Germany.  They   insisted  on  a  cabinet  position  for   General Boulanger  (January,  1886),   who,   on   becoming  minister  of war,  made  himself  notorious  by   his   democratic  utterance's.  The Opportunists,  on  their  return  to   power   (May,   1886),   dismissed Boulanger  from  his   office;  the   Radicals  supported  him.  His name  became  so  celebrated  that  a  personal  party   formed  itself around  him,   the   nucleus  of   it   being   the   Patriotic  League   and   a little group  of   Radical  deputies.

Presently  came  the  scandal  of   the   decorations.  Wilson,  the President's  son-in-law,  was  accused  of   selling  places  in   the

Legion  of   Honour.  Grevy   defended  his   son-in-law.  The  Chamber censured  the   ministry  and   demanded  the   retirement  of   the President.  Grevy  attempted  to  obtain  a   Radical  ministry,  but nobody  was  willing  to   form  a   ministry  with  Boulanger,  or   dared to   form  one  without  him.  Grevy,  unable  to   find  ministers,  at length   yielded  to   the   necessity  of   resigning  (December,  1887). The  Opportunists,  having  (thanks  to  the   Senate)  a  majority  in the   joint   meeting  of   the   Chambers,  wished  to   elect  Ferry   to   the Presidency;  but   the   Municipal  Council  of   Paris  declared  that  it could  not  answer  for   public   order  if   Ferry   were  elected.  The Conservatives,  remembering  Article  7   against  Ferry,   cast  their votes  for   General  Saussier;  Ferry   failed  of   a   majority  on   the   first ballot;  and   on   the   second,  Carnot,  a   moderate  Republican  who was  acceptable  to   the   Radicals,  was   duly   elected.

Carnot's  ministers  (Tirard,  December,  1887,   defeated  on  the question  of   Revision,  and   Floquet,  Radical,  April,   1887)   reverted to   the   policy   of   Republican  concentration,  but   they   had   to   contend with   the   new   Boulanger  party.

The  Boulangists  no   longer   fought   the   Opportunists  alone;   they had   quarrelled  with   the   Radicals  also,   and   aimed  to   suppress  the Parliamentary  system  itself,   which  they   reproached  with  weakness and   corruption.  The   party   had   no  positive   policy;   its   program was  summarized  in   three  words  by   Boulanger:  Dissolution, Revision,  Constituent  Assembly  (Constituante).  That  is   to  say, they   would  dissolve  the   existing  chambers  and   elect  an  assembly which  should  establish  a  republican  but   non-parliamentary  government, with   a   single   Chamber  and   an  executive  independent  of the   legislature  (substantially  the   Constitution  of   '48).   Above  all General  Boulanger  must  be   placed   in   power;  the   rest  would  come of   itself.  All   patriotic  Frenchmen  were  appealed  to,   including Conservatives  and  Catholics,  to   join   in   establishing  "   the   open republic."  The  party  took  the   name  of   Revisionist  or   National. It   adopted   a   novel  plan   of   campaign,  based  on   the   scrutin  de   liste: wherever  a  vacancy  was  to   be   filled  in   the   representation  of   a department,  it   nominated  General  Boulanger  for   the   seat  and   was thus  obtaining  a   little  plebiscite  in   his   favour.  The  plan   was begun  in   1888  and   was  carried  out  systematically.

The  Catholic  Conservatives,  opposed  to   Boulanger  up   to   that time  on  account  of   his   radical  utterances,  joined   the   Revisionists in   order  to   destroy   the   constitution.  They   used  Boulanger  to make  a   breach  in   the   Republic.  The  electoral  campaign  conducted by   the   Boulanger  committee  with  money  supplied  by   Con-

servatives  (the   Count  of   Paris  and   the   Duchess  d'Uzes)  was  promoted by   advertising  devices  similar  to   those  used  in   commerce: teams  of   posters,  portraits,  and   biographies  of   General  Boulanger,   songs   in   his   praise,   crowds  hired  to   shout  "   Vive   le   general

Boulanger!'3 In   presence  of   this   coalition,  Republicans  of   all   shades,   including the   Socialists,  joined   hands  to   oppose  the   threatened  dictatorship. Boulanger  was  very   badly   received  on   his   appearance  in the   Chamber,  and,   abandoning  the   parliamentary  field,   devoted himself  to   running  elections.  He   had   no  success  in   the   Republican strongholds  of   the   east  and   south;   but   he   was  repeatedly elected,  with  large   majorities,  in   the   Conservative  or   doubtful departments  of   the  north  and  midland.  He  was  elected  by 240,000  votes  against  165,000  in   Paris,   where  the   Radicals  supported him   through   dislike   of   the   ministry   (January,  1889)   ·   This success  was   his   ruin.*  His   tactics  depended  on   the   general-ticket system,  which  made  the  vote  of   a  whole  department  necessary to   fill   every  casual  vacancy  in   the   Chamber,  and   thus  made  possible a   kind  of   general   plebiscite  in   his   favour,   since  such  vacancies were  of   quite   frequent   occurrence.  Further,  at   the   approaching general   election,  the   system  would  make  it   possible   for   him   to unite  his   Conservative  and   Radical  supporters  in   each  department by   giving   each   set   a   share   in   his   general   ticket.  Boulanger  had   the imprudence  to   display   his   hand  in   advance  and   thus  forewarned his   adversaries.  The  scrutin  de   liste,   it   is   true,   had   been   a   sort of   fad,   held   both   by   Opportunists  and   Radicals  ; but   the   Republicans made   up   their   minds  to   sacrifice  it,   and,   in   spite   of   the Conservatives,  who  were  now  in   favour  of   it,   they   passed   a   law, in   February,  1889,   restoring  the   system  of   single   member  districts (scrutin   uninominal).  They   also   took   the   further  precaution of   making   it   unlawful  for   any   person  to   present   himself  as  a   candidate in   more  than  one   district.

The  Radical  party,  weakened  by   the   secession  of   the   Boulangists   and   by   the   recollection  of   Boulanger's  alliance  with  them, yielded  place   to   the   Opportunists  who  had   always   opposed  him. The  Floquet  ministry,  left  in   a  minority  on  the  question  of revision,  was  followed  by   the   Tirard-Constans  ministry  (February, 1889),   which  got   rid   of   Boulanger  by   ordering  him   to

* I   say   nothing  as   to   his   chances  of   success  by   an  appeal   to   force  against the   government  at   Paris,   where  the  swarms  of   police  seem  to   have  been favourable  to   him.  No   arrangements  for   such  a   stroke  had  been  made  by him.

appear   before  the   Senate,  constituted  as  a   high   court   for   the   trial of   offences  against   the   safety   of   the   state.  Boulanger  retired  to Belgium  without  making  a   defence,  and   at   once  ceased  to   be   of political  importance.  Later  in   the   year   the   great   Exposition  of 1889   produced  a  calm  in   politics.

At   the   general   election  of   1889   the   contest  was   between  the Republicans  of   all   shades  on   the   one   hand  and   the   coalition  of the   enemies  of   the   Parliamentary  Republic  on   the   other.  The Revisionists  wanted  a   different  sort  of   republic,  and   the   Conservatives and   clergy   wanted  no  republic   at   all.   The   Parliamentary Republicans  made  a   defensive  and   conservative  compaign,   defending  the   existing  constitution  against  the   Revisionists, and   the   laws   as   to   schools  and   the   military   service  against the   Catholics.

The  Republicans  carried  366   seats,  against  172   carried  by   the Conservatives  and  38   by   the   Revisionists.  The   Conservatives came  from  the   north  and   west;  the   Revisionists  from  the   Seine and  various  scattered  constituencies.  The  coalition  of   the   enemies of   the   Parliamentary  Republic  fell   to   pieces.  The   Revisionists, beaten   at   the   municipal   elections  of   Paris   (April,   1890), ended  by   disbanding  themselves  on  the   suicide  of   Boulanger.

Transformation  of   the  Extreme  Parties. - The  Republican majority  elected  in   1889,   on  a   negative   platform,  had   little   beyond a   policy   of   stand-still  :   to   keep   up   the   school  law   and   the   military law,   attacked  by   the   Conservatives,  and   to   give   quiet   to   the   country after   its   political   excitements.  In   four   years   the   Chamber passed  only   certain  commercial  laws  and  a   tariff  (1892)   which restored  the   protective  system.  Napoleon  in   1860  had   inaugurated the   system   of   commercial  treaties  aiming   at   a   gradual   introduction of   free   trade;   the   Chamber  refused  to   renew  these  treaties as   they   expired,   and   returned  to   the   plan   of   an   independent  tariff, with  the   right   of   lowering  or  raising   the   duties  at   will.  The coalition  of   the   great   manufacturers  with  the   agricultural  group, who  asked  for   protective  duties  on  grains   and   cattle,   secured  the adoption  of   a   complicated  scale  of   duties,  some  of   them  so   high as   to   seem  prohibitory.  The  act  established  two  tariffs :   a   maximum tariff   to   be   levied   on   the   products   of   countries  having   no reciprocity  treaty  with  France,  and  a  minimum  tariff  to   be   accorded by   such  treaties.  In  practice  most  countries  have obtained  the   minimum  tariff;  and  it   has   even  been  necessary  to go   below  this   minimum  in   the   case  of   Switzerland,  in   order  to preserve  friendly  commercial  relations  with  her.

The  strife  between  the   two  wings  of   the   Republican  party, stilled  by   the   common  danger  of   1889,   did   not   break  out  again with  much  energy.  The  official  policy   continued  to   be   Republican concentration.  The  ministerial  Republicans,  known  also as   Moderates,  had   a   majority  of   the   Chamber,  furnished  the   ministers, and   held   the   power.   The   Radicals,  reduced  to   a   small minority,  clung   to   the   wrecks  of   their  program  (Constitutional Revision,  Income  Tax,   and  Separation  of   Church  and  State), without  the   least  chance  of   carrying  a   single   point.

· But   in   the   extreme  parties   a   change   was  preparing.  A   small Socialist  party   of   workingmen  had   arisen  again   since  1879,   from the   amnestied  Communists;  but   it   had   remained  a   little  doctrinal church  without  political  activity,  and  had  been  divided,  since 1882,  into  two  hostile  sects.  The  Marxist  group,  the  least numerous,  chiefly  in   the   north,  adhered  to   the   German  collectivist  ideas,  and  had  a  centralized  organization.  The  other group,  the   "   French  Federation  of   Social-Revolutionist  Workingmen,"  declared  its   willingness  to   work  for   one  thing   at   a   time, in   order  to   make  its   whole  program  possible.  It   had   a   federal organization,  leaving  each  local  branch  to   govern   itself.  It   was nicknamed  Possible-ist  by   its   opponents.  It   broke  into  two   factions (1890)   on   a   constitutional  question  as   to   the   powers  of   its central  organs.  The  remnants  of   the   Blanc  Socialists  formed another  small  party ;   so   that   there  were  four   Socialist  parties   in the   field.  Their  agitation  was  still   confined  to   the   workingmen of   the   large   cities   and   the   mining   districts,  and   their   activity   was chiefly  directed  to  the  municipal  elections  of   Paris.  In   the Chamber  a  small  group,  called  the   Workingmen's  party,   had dwindled  to   a   few   revolutionary  deputies  without  a   definite  program. In   1893,   in   prospect  of   the   general   election,  all   the Socialist  factions  joined   in   a   league   for   bringing  in   the   "   Social Republic."  The  league  was  joined   by   the   discontented  Radicals, who  had   formed  the   main  body   of   the   Revision  party.  In   order to   win   over  the   peasants,  the   Socialist  congress  of   1892   had adopted  a   program  of   agrarian  reforms  ;   and   the   party   no   longer demanded  the  suppression  of   private  property  in   land,   so   far   as regards  peasant  farms.

At   the   same  time  the   Conservative  party  was  splitting  up. The  Count  of   Paris,   against   the   view   of   the   older  Orleanists,  had joined   in   the   cry   for   Revision  (1888),   and   was  acting   "   parallel   " with  the  Boulangists.  Abandoning  the  ground  of   traditional royalty,   he   had   declared  that   the   monarchy  must  be   re-established

by   popular   vote - the   principle  of   the   Imperialists.  Henceforth all   the   monarchist  parties   were  supporters  of   the   revolutionary doctrine  of   popular  sovereignty.  This  development  displeased both  the   old   Legitimists  and   the   old   Orleanists  ; but   a   new  generation of   Conservatives  were  displacing  them.

The  great   Conservative  party,   discouraged  by   the   reverse  of 1889,   gave   up   hope   of   restoring  monarchy  and   reverted  to   the policy   of   constitutional  opposition.  It   no   longer  attacked  the form  of   government,  taking  care,   however,  not  to   recognise  it openly.  It   simply   opposed  the   ministers  and   their   policy.  Some of   the   party   eventually  adopted  the   plan   of   publicly  accepting the  Republic  in   order  to  conciliate  Republican  voters.  The movement  was  hastened  by   the   Pope,   who  urged   Catholics  to   accept the   Republic   definitively,  and   try   to   control  it   in   the   interest of   religion.  This  policy,   officially   avowed  in   1892,   was  expressed in   a   phrase   attributed  to   Leo   XIII. , in   a   private   interview,  " to accept  the   constitution  in   order  to   modify   legislation  "   ( referring especially  to   changes  of   the   school  and   military  laws).  Thus, by   dismemberment  of   the   Conservative  party,  the   Catholic  party of   the   Rallied  was   formed.

This  evolution  gave  new  life   to   the   policy   of   conciliation  between the   Conservative  Right   and   the   Republican  Centre.  In 1893,   before  the   general  election,  the   ministerial  Republicans (Moderates)  disclosed  a   willingness  to   coalesce  with  the   Rallies and  declared  themselves  unalterably  opposed  to  the   Socialists by   closing  the   Labour  Exchange  of   Paris.  The  reconciliation in   the   Assembly  was  an  easy  matter  :   the   Right,   resigning  themselves to   the   school  and   military   laws,   demanded  only   a   conservative policy   in   social   matters  ; but   among  the   voters  the   case was  different,  for   the   Republican  voters  bore  a  grudge  against the   old   Conservative  leaders  who  had   tried  to   overturn  the   Republic in   1889.

The  Conservatives,  in   preparing  for   the   electoral  campaign  of 1893,   started  the   Panama  scandal,  which,  greatly   exaggerated  by the   press,  opened  an  era  of   denunciations,  violent  controversies, and   trials  for   libel.  The   leaders  of   both   wings   of   the   Republican party,   Moderate  and  Radical,  were,  as  a  result,  badly   compromised, being   suspected  of   having   themselves  taken  part   in   the financial  "   deals   "   of   the   Panama  Company,  or  of   having   neglected to   prosecute  those  guilty   of   them.  The  old   leaders  were pushed  aside  and  replaced  by   a   new  set.

New  Division  of   Parties. - The  new  Chamber  elected  in   1893

disclosed  these  transformations.  One  half  of   the   deputies  were new  men.  The  tactics  of   the   Right   had   failed;  only   30   Rallies and  60   other  Conservatives  had  been  elected.  The  Republican majority  continued  to   be   divided  into   Moderates  and   Radicals the   latter  counting  from  120  to   155   members.  On   the   extreme Left  the   Socialist  Union,  having  drawn  together  the   disorganized voters  of   the   old   Revision  party,   had   carried  55   seats.  For the   first   time   there  was  a   parliamentary  body   of   Socialists  sufficiently large   to   influence  politics.   On   the   whole  the   centre  of gravity  had   shifted  toward  the   Left.

The  Conservatives  being   now  practically  out  of   the   field,   the Republicans  had  again   to   choose  between  concentration  of   Moderates and   Radicals  against   the   two  extremes  (Conservatives  and Socialists)  and   a   homogeneous  ministry  made  up   wholly   of   Moderates or   wholly   of   Radicals.  Concentration  would  give   an  enormous majority,  but   it   would  impose   a  passive  policy,   for   the Moderates  had  exhausted  their  own  program  of   reforms  and favoured  no  part   of   the   Radical  program.  A   homogeneous  ministry was  advocated  by   the   theorizers  among  the   Moderates,  as harmonizing  with  Parliamentary  government;  but   the   Moderates alone  could  hope   to   supply   such  a   ministry,  and   it   was   doubtful if   they   could  give   it   a   majority  without  help   from  some  part   of the  Right  - which  would  have  ,   spoiled  the   homogeneity,  and would  have  been  a  return  to  conciliation,  a   difficult  thing   after the   electoral  campaign  of   1893. mous

According  to  official  utterances,  the   policy   of   all   ministries from  1889   to  1893   was  one  of   concentration;  that  is   to   say,  a majority  of   each   were   Moderates,  following  a   policy   of   conservation accompanied  by   democratic  declarations.  Since  those  years normal  political  life   has   been  disturbed  by   the   crimes  of   the Anarchists.  These  were  too   few  in   number  to   form  a  regular party,  and  refrained  on  principle  from  parliamentary  action,  refusing to   formulate  a  positive  program.  Their  aim,   they   said, was  to   free   the   individual  by   destroying  society.  But   by   adopting the   methods  of   the   Russian  terrorists,  especially  in   the   use of   explosives,  they   gave   themselves  a   prominence  wholly   out  of proportion  to  their  importance.  "   Propaganclism  by   facts,"  already tried   in   1892,   assumed  political  significance  when  the Anarchists  attacked  the   organs  of   the   State,   first  the   Chamber and   later   the   President.  The   public   powers   defended  themselves by   two  special   laws,   the   one  after  the   explosion  in   the   Chamber, December,  1893,   and  the   other  after  the   assassination  of   Carnot,

## 220  THE  PARLIAMENTARY  REPUBLIC.

June,   1894;   Anarchist  journals  were  suppressed,  their  propaganda and   their   crimes  were  stopped.  But   during   this   crisis concentration  had  fared  badly;  the   Radicals  had   opposed  the ministers  in   the   passage  of   the   exceptional  laws,   accusing  them of   confounding  the   Socialists  with  the   Anarchists.  At   the   election of   Carnot's  successor,  each  wing   of   the   Republicans  presented a   candidate  of   its   own.  Casimir  Perier,  the   Moderate candidate,  was  elected  by   a   large   majority  over  the   Radical Brisson  ; he   received  nearly   all   the   votes  of   the   senators.

A   personal  quarrel  broke  out   between  the   Socialists  and   the new  President.  Casimir  Perier,  by   his  name  and  fortune, seemed  to   symbolize  the   domination  of   the   bourgeoisie.  In   the Chamber  the  Moderates  and  the  Radicals  began   to   oppose  each other  squarely.  About  a   hundred  deputies,  undecided  between the   two,   were  ready   to   support  any   ministry,  but   anxious  to   avoid displeasing  their  constituents  by   an  unpopular  vote.  This  wavering group  placed  three  Moderate  ministries  in   minority (Casimir  Perier,  April,   1894;   Dupuy,   January,  1895 ; Ribot,  October, 1895)   on   certain  railroad  questions.  At   the   fall   of   the   second, Casimir  Perier  resigned  the   Presidency.  He   was   followed by   Felix  Faure,  elected  by   a   coalition  of   the   Moderates  and   the Right;  but   the   vote   for   Brisson  was   larger   than  at   the   previous election  ;   and   the   candidate  who   represented  the   opposition  to   the Radicals,  Waldeck-Rousseau,  was  dropped.  The  third  ministry, Ribot's,  reverted  to   Republican  concentration,  carried  an  amnesty law  in   order  to   soothe  the   Socialists,  and   even  presented  a   measure founded  on   the   Radical  doctrine  of   progressive  taxation  (progressive tax   on   inheritances).  The  wavering  members  were joining  the  Radicals;  Brisson  was  elected  President  of   the Chamber.

The  third  Moderate  ministry  was  succeeded  by   a   cabinet  having for   the   first   time   a   Radical  chief,   Leon  Bourgeois.  The  new premier  wished  to   form  a   concentration  cabinet,  but   with  a   reform policy;  but   finding   no   Moderates  willing  to   join   him,   he   was under  the   necessity  of   making  it   purely   Radical.  Of   the   old Radical  program  he   kept   only   a   single   point,  - the   progressive  income tax,  - coupling   with   it   a   series  of   economic  "   reforms  "   of the   democratic  sort.  He   promised  also  to   bring   light   to   bear on   the   financial  affairs  as   to   which  recent  Moderate  ministries were  suspected  of   irregularities.

On  this   program,  a  new  disposition  of   the  extremes  came about.  The  Right   joined   the   Moderates  in   resisting  the   income

tax,   thus  forming  a  party  of   social  conservatism  resting   on  the bourgeoisie,  the  clergy,  and  the   office-holders.  The  Socialists joined   the   political   Radicals,  forming  a   party   of   Social  Reform, and  appealing  to   the   masses.  The  old   local  division  was  still   observable, in   that   the   Conservatives  drew  their  chief  strength  from the   west  and   the   Social  Reformers  from  the   south.

By   winning  over  the   crowd  of   wavering  members,  the   Radicals gained  a  majority  in   the   Chamber  for   their  progressive  income tax   (1896).  The  Senate,  by   attacking  the   ministry,  raised  a   conflict between  the   two   houses  which  revived  the   agitation  for revision.

By   rejecting  certain  appropriation  bills,   the   Senate  compelled a   resignation  of   the   Bourgeois  ministry  and  the   formation  of   a homogeneous  ministry  of   Moderates  (Meline,  April,   1896)   which, by   the  help   of   the  Right,  obtained  a  majority.  But  no party   has   a   safe   majority  in   the   Assembly.  By   a  phenomenon new  in   France,  the   policy   of   each   party   is   dictated  by   its   central, or   less   extreme,  wing.   The  Right   has   abandoned  its   agitation for   the   repeal   of   the   laws   unfavourable  to   the   clergy,   and   demands only   resistance  to   further  disturbance  of   existing   society. The  Socialists,  at   the   other  extreme,  have  dropped  their  revolutionary schemes,   consenting  to   co-operate  with  the   political Radicals  in   carrying  a   partial   reform  of   society   and   in   procuring a   revision  of   the   constitution  by   lawful  means.  For   the   first   time since  1814   there  are   in   France  only   political  parties:  no  party avows  a   policy   of   subverting  the   Republic.

Political  Evolution  of   France  in   the   Nineteenth  Century. - At first   glance   the   political   history   of   France  during   the   past   century seems  an   incoherent  series  of   revolutions  ; hence  the   general opinion  of   other  countries  that   the   French  are  capricious  in   politics, and   do   not   know   what   they   want.  Precisely  the   same  was said   of   the   English   at   the   end   of   the   seventeenth  century.*

There  is,   however,  a   point   of   view   from   which  these  unaccountable revolutions  present  the   appearance  of   an  entirely   intelligible development.  The  French  nation  at  the  end  of   the   eighteenth century  was  still  monarchical,  but  already  democratic  and  free from  clerical  authority,  at   least  in   the   east  and   south,   where  the people  are  most  democratic,  peasant  proprietors  are  most  numerous, and   great   landowners  least  influential.  From  this  mass  of

*A  nation  whose  "fickleness"  is   notorious;  they   change  their  ideas frequently,  said  Torcy.

democratic  monarchists  a   small  revolutionary  party   branched  off in   1792,   in   the   contest  with   the   King   and   court,   becoming  Republican almost   against   its   will,   but   resolved  to   acquire   the   reins of   power,   by   force  if   need   be.   From  1792   to   1870   this   Republican party   seized   the   government  four   times,   in   each   case   by   the same  process,  a  sudden  stroke  at   Paris;  but,   being   only   a  minority, it   did   not  succeed  in   establishing  itself  firmly.  The  monarchical majority   presently   found  means  of   restoring  monarchy. Thus  every   Republican  revolution  was  followed  by   a  royalist restoration  which  lasted  until  a  new  generation  gave   the   Republican leaders  enough   recruits  to   make  a  new  revolution.  But each  revolution  did   away  with  some  feature  of   the   former  system which   could   not   be   restored.  Four  times  has   this   oscillation taken  place.

First.  The  revolutionary  party  gained   control  at   Paris  by   the loth  of   August,  1792;  and   kept   it   until  imperialism  was  set  up by   Bonaparte,  who  ousted  the   Republican  rulers,  without,  however, re-establishing  the   traditional  monarchy.  The  restoration of   1814,   brought  about  by   an  accident  of   foreign   policy,   was   but a  partial  one:  it   retained  the   social  democratic  organization created  by   the   Revolution  and  the  centralized  administrative 'organization  left   by   Napoleon.  Upon   this  democratic  society and   this   bureaucratic  administration,  it   superimposed  a  political mechanism  royalist  in   form,   imported  from  England.  The  revolution of   the   Hundred  Days   was  only   an  abortive  attempt,  the last   episode   in   Napoleon's  contest  with  Europe,  the   first  of   the military  revolutions  that  followed  the  general  pacification  of 1814.  It   had,   however,  an   influence  on   the   political   development by   uniting  the   remnants  of   the   revolutionary  Republicans  with the   discontented  Imperialists.

Second.  The   revolution  of   1830   was  made  by   a   small  Republican party   belonging  to   the   new  generation  but   brought   up   in   the faith   of   1793.   Too   weak  to   impose   its   will   on   France,  it   yielded the   power  to   the   Liberal  Royalists,  who  set  up   the   July   monarchy. It   sought  to  recover  control  by   armed  outbreaks  in Paris,  1831-34;  but   the   government,  resting   on   the   majority,  resisted, and   broke   up   these   attempts   by   force   of   arms,  prosecutions, and   legislation.  But   the   July   monarchy  remained  a   revolutionary government,  based   on   the   sovereignty  of   the   people and  compromised  by   the  tricolour  flag,   the  symbol  of   the Revolution.

Third.  In   the   next  generation  the   Republican  party,  reduced

to   a   few   secret  societies,  got   the   help   of   the   Socialist  workingmen and  made  the   revolution  of   1848.   This  time  it   set   up   the   "   Democratic and   Social   Republic."  But   it   was  unable  to   keep   the power:  the  great  majority  of   the   nation  was  against  it.   The Republican  Assembly  of   1848   expelled  it   from  the   government; and  when  it   tried  to   return  by   violence,  destroyed  it   by   military force  on  the   "   Days   of   June."  Reconstituted  as  a   democratic party,   it   was  assisted  by   the   monarchist  Assembly  of   1849;   an&lt;^ at   the   moment  when  it   had   begun   to   gain   the   democratic  regions of   the   south  and   east,   it   was  rudely   shattered  by   the   Imperialist coup   d'etat  of   1851.   Napoleon  III.  established  a  government, monarchical  in   its   processes,  but   even  more  revolutionary  in   principle than   the   July   monarchy.  From  the   revolution  of   1848   he borrowed  not  only   the   power  of   the   people   to   make  the   Constitution, but   also   universal  suffrage,  the   starting-point  of   a  new democratic  regime.

Fourth.  The  Republican  party,  reconstituted  after  the   amnesty of   1859,   gathered  strength  in   the   new  generation,  and   before  the end  of   the   Empire  formed  in   the   large   cities  and  democratic regions  a  radical  party   sufficiently  numerous  to   begin   operations in   the   electoral  field.  It   made  the   revolution  of   1870,   which,   like that   of   1792,   was  an  outcome  of   foreign   policy.

But  the  old  royalist  parties,  in   the   confusion  of   the   war, gained  an  accidental  majority  in   the   sovereign  Assembly  which came  into  power  in   1871.  The  Republican  party  was  rent  in twain.  The  Socialist  party  of   Paris  tried  to   obtain  control  by the   old   Republican  method  of   a   revolution  in   Paris  ; it   set   up   the Commune  and  was  exterminated.  France  had  received  a  political education  and   no   longer   accepted  revolutions  in   Paris  as decisive.  The  Republicans  of   the   provinces  supported  the   lawful government,  and   as  early   as  1871   had   a   majority   of   the   voters.

Once  more  a   Republican  revolution  was  followed  by   a  monarchical reaction,   which   failed,   however,  to   bring   about  another restoration.  Its   failure  was  due  to  the   revolutionary  emblem, the   tricolour  flag,   now   become  so  completely  the   emblem  of   the nation  that  one  of   the   royalist   parties   (the   Orleanist)  could  not make  up   its   mind  to   sacrifice  it.   The   Republicans,  by   a  compromise with   these   dissident  monarchists,  at   length   obtained  the adoption  of   a  republican  constitution - parliamentary,  like  the Orleanist  monarchy  ; democratic,  like   French  society.

Little  by   little   the   royalist   generation  was  passing  away  and its   place   was  taken  by   Republicans.  Since  1869   the   latter  were

in   majority  in   the   cities;   in   1876   they   became  definitely  masters of   the   east   and   south,   which  assured  them  a   majority  in   the   Assembly and   control   of   the   government.  It   had   no   further  motive for   making  revolutions  ; it   had   only   to   maintain  the   existing   system in   order  to   win   over  gradually  the   west  and   north.  Revolutions ceased   when   the   Republican  party,   the   only   one  organized for   making   them,   had   no   further  need   of   revolutions.

The  political  development  of   the   nineteenth  century  has   been a  series  of   ebbs  and   flows,  but   the   tendency  has   been  toward republicanism.  By   repeated  seizures  of   the   government  and  an agitation  more  and  more  effective,  the   democratic  Republicans have  finally   conquered  France.

But  the   revolutions  have  been  directed  only   to   the   structure of   the   central  government  and  the   possession  of   power.  The social  organization  and   the   administrative  mechanism  have  been preserved  without  serious  change.

The  democratic  social  organization,  free  from  clerical  control, established  by   the   Revolution,  was  acceptable  to   the   Republicans, and  sufficiently  popular  to   escape  attack.  The   monarchical  governments have   tried   indirectly   to   revive   the   influence  of   the   great landowners,  the   middle  class,   and   the   clergy,   but   they   have  not touched  any  of   the   social  institutions - peasant  proprietorship, equal   division  of   inheritances,  civil   equality,  eligibility  for   public office  without  distinctions  of   birth,   exclusion  of   clerical  control: France  has  steadily  preserved  the   social  system  of   the   Revolution.

The  centralized  and   bureaucratic  administrative  system  of   the Empire  has  also  remained  nearly  intact.     All   the   parties,  when  i in   opposition,  have  declared  it   to   be   oppressive,  but,   on  attaining office,   have   preserved  it   as  an   instrument  of   power.     Of   the   older Imperial  regime  France  still   retains  :

- (a)   The  central  administration  with  its   ministers,  the   departmental administration  with   its   prefects   and   sub-prefects,  and   its control  over  the   communes  ;
- (b)   The   judicial   organization  with   its   body   of   court  counsellors and  its   permanent  judges,  with  its   Ministry  of   Justice   composed of   advocates  and  prosecuting  attorneys,  with  its   antiquated  and formal  civil  procedure  and  its   secret  inquisitorial  criminal  procedure, with   the   Napoleonic  code   almost  unchanged  (the   granting of   divorce  is   only   a   return  to   an   institution  taken  away   in   1815)   I with  its   sale   of   the   posts   of   solicitor,  notary,  registrar,  and   bailiff;

(c)   The  administrative  justice   of   the   Councils  of   Prefecture

and   the   Council  of   State,   briskly   attacked  by   the   Liberals  under Napoleon  III.,   but   later   accepted,  including  the   famous  Article  75 of   the   Constitution  of   the   year   VIII.  ;*

(d)   The   ecclesiastical  organization  established  by   the   Concordat and  organic  laws;  the   Legion  of   Honour,  with  its   titles  copied from  noble  orders  ;

(e)   The   University,  with  its   rectors,  inspectors;  its   lycees,   with their  military  discipline;  its   Normal  School,  and  its   system  of competitive  examinations  ;

(/)   The   revenue  system,  with  its   direct  and   indirect  taxes,   its monopolies  and  octrois,  and  its   agents  divided  off   into  special services.  New  taxes  have  been  created,  old   ones  have  been  increased, loans   have   been   contracted,  the   national  revenue  has been  greatly  enlarged,  but   neither  the   assessment  nor  the   mode of   collection  has   been   changed.

The  customs  system  instituted  to   protect  the   manufacturers  of fabrics  and   iron   wares  by   duties  all   but   prohibitory,  was  shaken I by   Napoleon  III.   and   opposed  by   the   agricultural  regions   of   the | south  and  the   traders  of   the   seaports,  and   has   been  almost  made over  since  1871.

Only   four  changes  of   importance  have  been  made  in   the   Imperial system   in   a   century  :

1.   The   municipal  authorities  have  been  made  elective - a   beginning of   local   political    life   of   decentralization.     Following  the iold   aristocratical  principle,  these  offices  are  without  salary,   but they   are   sought   as  stepping-stones  to  national   services  where salaries  are  paid.

2.   The   military   system   has   been  transformed,  in   imitation  of

*This  article,  which  forbade  suits  against  administrative  officers  without permission  of   the   government,  was  abrogated  by   decree  of   the   Government of   National  Defence  in   September,  1870.     The  author  must  have  had in   mind  the   unexpected  result  of   the  abrogation.     The  ordinary  courts held   that   it   opened   the   way   for   suits   against   public   officers  for   illegal   acion   toward  private  citizens  ; in   other  words,  that  it   introduced  in   France tie   familiar  doctrine  of   our  common  law   that  an  official  who  acts  without egal   warrant  may   be   proceeded  against  as  a  private  trespasser.     But this   view  was  not  sustained  by   the  tribunal  des   conflits - the   final  court &gt;f   appeal.     That  court  decided  in   1873   that,   under  the   separation  of   powTS,   the   judiciary  cannot  interfere  with  the   action  of   the   executive  and   its agents.     The   result  of   abrogating  Article  75   was,   therefore,  to   cut   off   even he   limited  right   that  previously  existed  of   bringing  suit  against  official wrongdoers  by   permission   of   the  government.     (See    Ducrocq,    "Droit A.dministratif,"  6th   ed.,   vol.   i.,   p.   644.)- TR. 15

15

Prussia,  by   the   introduction  of   universal  military  service  for   a short  term,  and  the   abolition  of   the   national  guard  - retaining, however,  the   old   military   schools.

3.   Public  education  has   been  modified  by   the   creation,  since 1850,   of   secondary  schools  for   boys,   managed  by   ecclesiastics, in   competition  with  the   state  schools;  by   the   reform  of   higher education  on  the   model  of   the   German  universities  ; by   the   institution of   gratuitous  and   compulsory  primary  education,  free   from clerical  control,  and   a   system  of   schools  for   girls  - both   copied from   Germany.     These   changes   have   created   a    body    of    lay teachers  in   competition  with  the   teaching  brotherhoods  and   sisterhoods of   the   previous  system.

4.   The   condition  of   labourers  has   been   modified  by   freedom  of combination  and  by   the   creation  of   syndicates  modelled  on  the English  trade  unions.

With  the   exception  of   making  the   mayors  and   local  councMs elective, - which  was  only   an  application  of   the   new  democratic policy,  - the   evolution  has   been  mainly   the   introduction  of   foreign institutions  into   France.

France,  then,  is   governed  by   men  chosen  on  the   democratic principle  of   election  ; its   political   chiefs  are  the   deputies,  chosen directly,  and   the   senators  and   ministers,  chosen  indirectly,  by   the voters - all   under  the   control  of   the   press  and   public   opinion.  It is   administered  by   a   bureaucratic  body   of   officials,  divided  into special   services,  which  are  organized  as  a   hierarchy,  with  chiefs who  co-opt  and  control  each  other,  subject  to  regulations  and special   usages,   but   independent  of   public   opinion.

These  two  sets  of   public   servants,  drawing  their  authority  from two  opposing  principles,  tend  to  apply  two  conflicting  conceptions of   government.  The  politicians,  having  only   a   temporary power   delegated   from   below,   incline  primarily  to   please the   voters  on  whom  they   depend,  by   conforming  to   the   prevailing opinion.  The  officials,  exercising  a  power  conferred  from  above and   practically  for   life,   tend  to   see   in   the   citizens  subjects  of administration,  who  must  be   kept   in   due   submission  to   authority and  regulations. porary

Monarchical  governments  prevent  conflicts  between  these  two sets   by   giving   preponderance  to   the   officials  ;   the   democratic  system makes   the   conflict  perpetual.  The   elected  representatives  of the   people,   wielding  the   sovereignty,  are  not  content  with  exercising an   indirect  control  over  the   officials  through  budget   votes and   the   enactment  of   laws.  They   wish  to   share  with  the   official

class  the   practical  sovereignty,  which  is   the   executive  power. The  Chamber  has  established  its   superiority  over  the   administrativ.e   officers  through  the   persons  of   the   ministers,  its   indirect agents,  who,  in   becoming  official  heads  of   the   services,  have inherited  the   absolute  authority  over  the   official  class  formerly exercised  by   the   royal   and   imperial  ministers.  And  as   the   ministers, once   installed  at   the   top   of   the   hierarchy   and   surrounded  by permanent  officials,  readily  catch  the   spirit   of   their  subordinates and  the  traditions  of   authority,  the  Chamber  keeps  them in   dependence  upon   itself  by   means  of   the   Budget  Committee and  interpellations.

It   is   this   that   makes  the   Interpellation  the   leading   institution of   French  parliamentary  procedure.  The  deputies,  the  sole direct  representatives  of   the   citizens,  are   led,   by   a   logical   consequence of   the   democratic  principle,  to   assume  the   part   of   directors and   defenders  of   the   people ; individually  they   come  into   personal contact  with   the   ministers  and   officials,  to   hasten  the   slow action  of   the   latter   in   the   settlement  of   business  matters  affecting their  constituents,  to   check  or  repress  abuses  of   power,  and   to nominate  candidates  for   vacant  offices,  or  even  to   insure  their own  personal  influence  or   that  of   their  particular  group.  This is   what  is   called  "   the   pressure  of   the   deputies  on  the   administration." The   frequency   of   interpellations  and   the   pressure  of the   deputies  are  condemned  by   all   writers  on  constitutional  law as   interferences  of   the   legislature  with  the   executive,  contrary  to the   doctrine  of   the   separation  of   powers.  They   have  none  the less   become  fundamental  features  of   the   political  life   of   France. They   are  practical  contrivances  which  enable  two  contradictory sets  of   institutions  to   exist  side   by   side:  a   democratic  political system  and  a  permanent  administrative  hierarchy.  It   compels the  permanent  officials  to  submit  to  the  people's  chosen representatives.*

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.

For   bibliography  see  chap.   v.  On  the   Commune,  A.   Schulz,  "   Bibl.  de la   Guerre  Franco-Allemande  et   de   la   Commune,"  1886.  A   bibl.  may   be

*   An  Interpellation  is   a   formal  question  addressed  to   the  ministers, calling  on   them  for   explanation  and  defence  of   their  action  on  any  matter. It   may   be   introduced  by   any   deputy,  and  is   entitled,  under  the  rules,  to a  place  on  the  program  of   some  sitting  within  a  month  of   its   introduction.- TR.

found  by   A.   Adler  in   *'   Handworterbuch  der   Staatswissenschaften,"  under the   word  "Commune,"  (1891).

SOURCES. - See  bibl.  of   chap.   v.   The  most  important  parliamentary documents  are:  i.  "Enquete  sur  les  Actes  du  Gouvernement  de  la Defense  Nationale,"  reports,  testimony  of   witnesses,  official  despatches (see   objections  and  corrections,  Annales  de   1'Assemblee,  vol.  xxv.)  ;   2. "   Enquete  sur   1' Insurrection  du   18   Mars,"  at   Paris  and   in   the   country  (see for   claims,  "   Annales,"  vol.   xi.).

ANNUAL  :   Daniel  (pseud.  d'A.  Lebon),  "   L'Anjiee  Politique,"  since  1874. In   addition  to   the  publications  in   chap.   vi.   :   The  Fran$ais  (royalist liberal,  important  for   the   Assembly  period),  for   the  period  1871-78  ;   the Republique  Fran^aise,  Gambetta's  organ,  the  Soleil,  the  Gaulois,  the Figaro,  and  the  X1X&lt;?.  Siecle.

In   addition  to   the   reviews  :   Revue  Politique  et   Litteraire,  called  the Revue  Bleue,  the  Revue  Socialiste.  (For   the  history  of  the  socialist parties  in   France  there  is   a   very  abundant  collection  in   the   Musee  Social founded  by   the   Comte  de   Chambrun).

The  recollections,  memoirs,  and  letters  are  of   small  importance.J.   Simon,   "   Souvenirs  du   4   Septembre,  1874";  "   Le   Gouvernement  de   M. Thiers,"  1879.- Herisson,  "Journal  d'un  Officier  d'Ordonnance,"  1885.J.   de   Gastyne,  "   Memoires  Secrets  .  .  .   de   la   Commune,"  1871. - H.   Pessard, "   Mes  Petits  Papiers,"  2   series,  1887-88.-  Jourde,  "   Souvenirs  d'un  Membre dela  Commune,"  1877. - Beslay,  "Mes  Souvenirs,"  1873.

A   collection  of   placards  of   1870-71  :   J.   Claretie,  "   Les   Murailles  Politiques de  la   France,"  1870-71,  1880,  in-4.  "Documents  pour  .  .  .   1'Hist. de   la   Commune,"  1871,   collection  of   the   official  acts  of   the   Commune.

WORKS.- GENERAL  WORKS  :   Zevort,  "   Hist,  de   la   y^   Republique,"  vol. i.,   1896,   stops   at   May   24,   1873.- Oncken,  "   Zeitalter  des   Kaisers  Wilhelm," 2   vols.,   1890-92,   Oncken  coll.

ON  THE  ATTEMPT  AT  RESTORATION  IN  1873:  Chesnelong,  "La  Campagne Monarchique  d'Octobre,  1873,"  1895.- E.Daudet,  "   Trois  Mois  d'Hist.  Contemp.,"  1873.

ON  THE  COMMUNE  :   there  is   no  scientific  history   ;   the   leading  works  are  : Maxime  Du   Camp,   "Les  Convulsions  de   Paris,"  5   vols.,  1878-79,  conservative.-Arnould,   "   Hist,  de   la   Commune,"  3   vols.,  1878.- Lissagaray,  "   Hist, dela  Commune,"  1896 edit.  ;   both  communalist.

ON   MAY  16   :   "   Du   16   Mai   au  2   Sept.   1877,"  1877,   published  by   H.   Monod. DESCRIPTION  OF   FRENCH  INSTITUTIONS:  A. Lebon,  "Das  Staatsrecht  der Franzosischen  Republik,"  1880  (Marqu.  coll.). - Block,  "   Dictionnaire  de 1'Admin.  Frang.,"  3d   edit,   1891. - The  collection  in   course  of   publication, "La  Vie  Nationale,"  a  series  of   popular  works,  contains  much  information.-A.   L.   Lowell,  "Parties  and  Governments  in   Continental  Europe," 2   vols.,   1897;   chapters  i   and   ii   give   an  excellent  sketch  of   the   institutions and  party   divisions  of   the   third  Republic.- Dupriez,  "   Les  Ministres  dans les   principaux  pays,"  2   vols.,  2d   ed.,   1893;   Part  VIII.  is   an   instructive essay  on   the   "   role   of   the   ministers  in   France."

ON   FINANCE  :   Mathieu  Bodet,   "   Les   Finances  Frangaises  de   1870   a  1878," 2   vols.,  1881. - Amagat,  "   Les  Finances  Franchises,"  1889. - L.   Say,   "Dictionnaire des   Finances."

## CHAPTER  VIII.

BELGIUM    AND   HOLLAND.

Formation  of   the   Kingdom  of   the   Netherlands. - The   kingdom of   the   Netherlands  was  made  up   of   territory  that   had   been  conquered by   France  and  reduced  to   French  departments,  but  was made  independent  again   in   1814.  It   was  made  by   uniting   three pieces   which  had  been  separate  before  the   French  annexation: the   former  Austrian  Netherlands,  the   Bishopric  of   Liege   (Liittich),   and   the   old   United  Provinces  (known  as   Holland).

For   these  countries  the   French  occupation  had   been,   not  a   mere episode,  but   a   profound  transformation.  It   had   swept  clean  the ground  on  which  the   political  edifice  of   the   nineteenth  century was  to   be   built.  There  were  in   the   Low  Countries  before  the Revolution  provinces  of   very  unequal  importance,  governed under  old   and   dissimilar  customs,  some  of   them  without  political rights   (the   Belgian  districts  conquered  by   the   Dutch).  Society was  divided  into  classes  unequal  before  the  law;   all   political power  was  in   the   hands  of   certain  families  or  privileged  bodies; the   central  government  was  weak  ;   religious  liberty   was  not  recognised. France   had   swept   away  all   the   privileges,  all   the   customs, all   the   political  bodies  of   the   provinces.  She   had   set  up in   their   stead  the   French  system - equality  among  the   citizens, equality  among  the  provinces,  systematic  division  into  departments, each   provided   with   a   complete  system  of   public   services. The   old   aristocratic  and   irregular  system  was  gone  ;   a   new   democratic society,   with   a   centralized  administration,  had   been   created in   its   stead.  . This  new  society  has   made  the   Netherlands  of   the nineteenth  century.

The  French  revolutionary  regime  has  remained  firmly  rooted in   the   country  ; but   French  rule   did   not  survive  the   fall   of   Napoleon. The   inhabitants  had   little   liking   for   it,   as   it   came  to   them in   the   form  of   the   military  conscription  and   the   Continental blockade - death  and  ruin.  As   soon  as   the   French  armies  withdrew French  administration  collapsed.  The  movement  began with   the   arrival  of   the   allied  army  at   The   Hague.  Some  members of   the   old   Dutch  government  organized  a   provisional  admin229

istration,  recalled  the   former  sovereign,  William,  and  called  a meeting  of   notables  to   advise  as   to   further  proceedings.  The head  of   the   provisional  government,  Hogendorp,  proposed  to re-establish  the   old   system;  that  is   to   say,   the   confederation  of provinces  possessing  unequal  rights.  Professor  Kemper,  though an  enemy  of   the   French,  showed  that  the   old   government  was no   longer   possible,  and   induced  the   Assembly  to   break  with  the past,   to   accept  the   work  of   the   Revolution,  and   establish  a   new unitary  kingdom.*  The  prince   took  the   title   of   William  I.,   King of   the   Netherlands.

The  Belgian  provinces  and  the   Bishopric  of   Liege,   having  no legitimate  sovereigns,  were  treated  as  vacant  territory.  The Allies,  being   friendly  to   the   Orange  family,  gave   these  lands to   the   kingdom  of   the   Netherlands  in   order  to   strengthen  it   and "   put   it   in   a   position   to   resist   attack  until   the   powers  could  come to   its   aid."  The   new   kingdom  was  to   serve  as  a   barrier  against France.  The  great  powers,  by   an  agreement  inserted  in   the treaties  of   Vienna,  declared  it   neutral,  and  engaged  with  each other  to   respect  its   neutrality.  The  neutrality  of   the   Netherlands became  and   has   remained  a   principle  of   European  public law.

Belgian  Opposition. - The  union  of   the  Dutch  and  Belgian Netherlands  seemed  to   be   a  combination  advantageous  to  all. Belgium  could  supply  agricultural  and  factory  products  ;   Holland had   its   shipping   and   its   colonies;  the   two  countries  complemented each   other.  At   least   one-half  of   the   Belgians   spoke Flemish,  that  is   to   say,   Dutch.

The  treaty  of   1814   stipulated  for   equal   protection  of   both forms  of   worship  and  representation  for   the  Belgians  in   the States-General.  It   said  "   the   Union  shall  be   close  and  complete." But   it   was  made  under  conditions  that  made  it   hateful to   the   Belgians.

The  king   had  promised  a  constitution,  and  appointed  a  commission, sitting   in   Holland,  to   draw  it   up.   The   Fundamental Law  established  a  constitutional  monarchy  of   the   sort  desired  by Louis  XVIII.  and  the  English  Tories/  The  king   shared  the legislative  power  with  the   States-General,  and  exercised  the   executive power   through   ministers  ; he   had  the   right   of   making" peace  and  war.  But  the   ministers  were  not  made  responsible  to the   States-General.  These  had   only   a  very   limited  right   of   pro-

*   The   new  kingdom  re-established  the   old   provinces,  dividing  the   largest, however,  Holland  and  Flanders.

ing   legislation,  and  no  right   of   amendment.  Of   the   two Chambers  composing  them,  the  upper  was  appointed  by   the tdng;   the   other  was  elected  by   the   provincial  councils,  which  in turn  were  elected  by   the   property  owners,  through  the   medium of   electors.  The  system  of   administration  established  by   the French  was  retained:  each  province  had  a  governor  and  each commune  a   burgomaster,  all   appointed  by   the   King.   The  French codes  and  hierarchy  of   judges   were  retained,  but   trial  by   jury was  suppressed.*  In   principle,  liberty  of   the   person,  of   residence, and   of   the   press  was  accepted,  but   the   deposit   and   stamp were  continued  for   newspapers,  and  the   government  could  suspend all   forms  of   liberty   in   times  of   disturbance. pend

This  constitution  displeased  the   Belgian  Liberals,  brought  up in   the   school  of   Benjamin  Constant.  They   said   its   provision  for representation  was  illusory,  being   subject   to   the   personal  power of   the   King;   and   that   its   liberties  were  only   a   sham,   being   left   at the   mercy  of   the   administration.

The  constitution  laid  down  the   principle  of   liberty   of   worship and   of   the   press,  and   thereby   it   offended  the   Belgian   Catholics. The  bishops  of   Belgium  condemned  it   publicly  in   1815,   in   their Doctrinal  Judgment,  which  forbade  their  flocks  to   swear  to   support the   constitution.  "   We   have  thought  it   necessary  to   declare  that nor«e  of   our  spiritual  subjects  can,  without  making  themselves guilty   of   a   great   crime,   take   the   different  oaths  prescribed  by   the constitution."  Among  the   provisions  "   opposed  to   the   spirit   and maxims  of   the   Catholic  religion,  the   Judgment  cites  liberty   of religious  opinion,  equality  of   civil  and   political  rights,   the   right of   publicly  exercising  every   form  of   worship,  and   liberty   of   the press.  To   swear  to   maintain  freedom  of   religious  opinion  and equal   protection  for   all   forms  of   worship  is   to   swear  to   maintain and   protect  error  as   truth,   to   favour  the   progress  of   anti-Catholic doctrines,  to   sow,  as   far   as  we  can,   in   the   field   of   the   family   the foulness  and  poison  that  shall  infect  present  and   future  generations. .  .   The  Catholic  Church,  which  has   always  thrust  from its   bosom  error  and   heresy,   could  not  regard   as   its   true  children those  who  should  dare  to   swear  that   which  she   has   never  ceased to   condemn.  This  dangerous  new  doctrine  was  introduced,  for the   first   time  in   a   Catholic  country,  by   the   revolutionists  of France,  about  twenty-five  years  ago,  and  then  the   'head  of   the Church  condemned  it   emphatically.  To  swear  to   keep   a   law

*   It   has   not   been  re-established,  up   to   the   present  time,   in   the   kingdom of   the   Netherlands.

which  makes  all   the   King's   subjects,  whatever  their  religious  belief, capable   of   rilling   all   offices  and   dignities,   would  be   to   justify in   advance  the   measures  taken  to   confide  the   interests  of   our   holy religion  in   Catholic  provinces  to   Protestant  officials."  The bishops  also  called  attention  to  the   article  "   which  authorizes liberty   of   the   press  and   opens  the   door  to   an   infinitude  of   disorders, a   deluge  of   anti-Christian  writings."  The  Archbishop of   Malines,  who   wrote  the   Doctrinal  Judgment,  was  brought  before the   courts  and   condemned  to   deportation.  But   the   Belgian clergy   refused  absolution  to   the   notables  who   had   taken  the   oaths.

This  constitution,  yiewed  with  disfavour  by   'both  Liberals  and Catholics,  had   been  established  in   a   way   that -gave  offence  to   all Belgians.  The  King  convoked  an  assembly  of   about  1600 Belgian  notables  to   approve  it  :   the   asse  .ibly   pronounced  against it   by   a   strong   majority - 796   to   527.   The   government  then  declared that   those   who   had   rejected   it   for   religious   reasons  (126 Belgian  Catholics)  ought   to   be   disregarded;  it   then  added  to   the number  in   favour  those  who  had  not  voted.  In   this   way   it   decided that   the   Fundamental  Law   had   been  adopted  by   Belgium.

The  government  made  itself  even  more  unpopular  than  the constitution  among  the   Belgians.  The  seat  of   government  was in   Holland.  Nearly  all  office-holders,  high   and  low,   were Dutch.  In   1830   one  of   the   seven  ministers  was   Belgian;  n  of the  117   officials  of   the   Interior  were  Belgian;  288   out  of   1967 military  officers  were  Belgian.  In   the   States-General,  Belgium,' with  three  and  one-half  millions  of   inhabitants,  had  the   same representation  as   Holland  with  two  and  one-half  millions.  By detaching  a   few   Belgian  members,  the   government  could  have a   majority  for   Dutch  measures.  All   the   public   establishments, the   Bank,   the   military   schools,  were  Dutch.  The   Dutch  brought to   the   new   kingdom  a   heavy   debt  which  increased  the   fiscal  burdens of   the   Belgians.  They   introduced  their  system  of   taxes the   grist   tax  and  the   meat  tax  - which  were  disliked  by   the people   of   Belgium.  The  Belgians  felt   that  they   were  treated  as an  annexed  people  and  exploited  by   the   Dutch.

The  government  seemed  to  aim  at  assimilating  the  Belgians by   compelling  them  to  change  their  language.  From  1819   on knowledge  of   Dutch  was  required  of   every  person  entering  the public  service.  In   1822  Dutch  was  made  the   official  language, except  in   the   Walloon  districts,  for   all   public   and   judicial   acts. Now,  the   language  of   the   bar,   even   in   the   Flemish  districts,  was French.  By   this   measure  the   government  alienated  the   lawyers.

It   made  itself  odious  to   newspaper  men  by   prosecuting  them before  exceptional  tribunals.  It   succeeded  in   irritating  the clergy   by   establishing  in   1825   the   Philosophical  College   of   Louvain   and   requiring  future  ecclesiastics  to   spend   two  years   in   study there.  The  kingdom  of   the   Netherlands  was  hardly   accomplishing what   the   treaty   of   1814   promised - an   "   intimate  and   perfect union."

Kevolution  of   1830. - The  Belgians  were  discontented,  but   had no  practicable  means  -of   escape   from  Dutch  rule.     The   King   was against   them,   and   the   King   was   the   government.     In   the   States1 General  the   Dutch  had   one-half  of   the   votes  and,   thanks  to   the , Orangists  of   Antwerp  and  Ghent,  always  had  a  majority.    The Belgians  were  not  even  united  among  themselves  ;   some  were j Catholic  partisans  of   the   old   regime,   others  were  Liberals  and devoted  to   the   principles  of   the   French  Revolution.     In   1827   it seemed  as   if   the   Catholics,  appeased  by   the   Concordat  arranged | between  the   King   and   the   Pope,   were  going   to   come  over  to   the side   of   the   government.

But  some  of   the   political  leaders  of   the   Catholic  party   had lately   adopted  a   new  doctrine  mainly   inspired  by   the   reading   of Lamennais.  Instead  of   crying  down  the   liberty  condemned  by the   Doctrinal  Judgment  of   the   bishops  in   1815,   they   were  insisting on   it   as   favourable  to   the   triumph  «of   Catholic  truth.  The Liberal  Catholics  were,  perhaps,  not  very  numerous,  but  they \ took   the   lead   of   the   party,   and   concerted  action  in   common  with the   Liberals.

In   1828   the   two   Belgian   parties,   Catholic  and   Liberal,  formed the   Union  to   oppose  the   common  enemy,  the   Dutch  government. They   began   with  petitions  to   the   King   demanding  the   liberties guaranteed  by   the   constitution.     Then  they   demanded  a   separate dministration  for   Belgium.     The  conflict  led   to   a   rising.

It   was   the   July   revolution  in   France  that   gave   the   Belgians   the dea   of   a   revolt.     At   the   anniversary  of   the   king's   accession, August   25,   1830,   the   opera   La   Muette  (the   Mute)   was  played   at Brussels.    Its   appeals   to   Liberty   excited  the   spectators  ; they   cried, Let   us   do   as   the   French  have   done."    The   mob   demolished  the K)lice   offices  and   the   place   where  the   ministerial  organ  was  pubished.      It   was  still   only   a   Brussels  outbreak;  but   the   citizens aised   the   Brabancon  flag,   and   the   province  of   Brabant  was   in evolt.      Prince  Frederick,  eldest  son  of   .the   King,   went  to   Brusels   with   troops  and  put   himself  in    communication   with   the eading   men.     It   was  agreed   to   ask   the   King   to   convoke  the

States-General  to   consider  the   question  of   giving   each  country  a separate  government  under  the  same  King   (a   personal  union). The  States-General  met  and   the   King   spoke   against  the   separation. At   Brussels,  on   the   23d   of   September,  Prince  Frederick's army  of   10,000  men  seized  the   upper  part   of   the   city   and   attacked the   lower  part.   But   the   troops   found  it   barricaded  and   defended by   citizens  in   arms.  After  three  days   of   fighting  the   army  was driven  off.  The  insurgents  had   formed  an  executive  committee to   take   charge   of   the   insurrection  ;   the   committee  organized  itself as  a   provisional  government  and  issued  a  proclamation  calling home  the   Belgians  in   the   King's   army:   "   Belgian   blood  has   been shed.  .   .   This   shedding  of   generous  blood  has   broken  every  tie. The  people  of   Belgium  are  unshackled."  On   the   2gth   of   September the   States-General  pronounced  for   separation,  by   50   votes against   44 ; but   it   was  too   late.

All   the   Belgian   provinces  rose   in   revolt.  The   Dutch  held   only two  fortified  places,   Maestricht  and  Antwerp.  The  provisional government  decreed,  October  4,   "   The  provinces  of   Belgium, detached  from  Holland  by   force,   shall  constitute  an   independent state."  It   promised  to   draw  up   a   draft  of   a   constitution,  and   to convoke  a   national  congress  to   establish  a   system  of   government for   all   Belgium.  King   William  tried  to   arrest  the   rupture.  He sent  his   son  to   Antwerp  to   promise  a   Belgian  administration, managed  by   Belgians.  The  Prince  even  declared:  "   Belgians, I   recognise  you  as  an   independent  nation ;   choose  freely   deputies to   a   national  congress."  The  provisional  government  replied: "The  people  have  driven  the  Dutch  from  Belgian  soil;   they alone,   and   not   the   Prince  of   Orange,   are  at   the   head   of   this   movement to   gain   independence  and   establish  their  nationality."

Founding  of   the   Kingdom  of   Belgium. - The  Congress  called to   make  a   constitution  for   Belgium  was  elected  by   men  'twentyfive   years  of   age   and   paying   a   tax  varying   from  13   to   150   florins, according  to   locality,  or   following  a   liberal  profession  (in   all 44,000  voters).

There  were  four  parties:  the   Orange  Monarchists  (Ghent  and Antwerp) ;   the   Republicans,  whose  leader,  Potter,  had   conducted the   rising;   the   partisans  of   annexation  to   France  (in   the   Lieg-e region);  and   finally,   the   partisans  of   a   national  monarchy,  far   the most  numerous  of   the   four.

The  Congress  voted,  at  the   outset,  four  principles:  ist,   The people   of   Belgium  are   independent.  2d,   The  people   of   Belgium adopt   as   the   form  of   their   government  an   hereditary  monarch)/

with  representative  institutions  (174   votes  against  13   Republicans). "   It   was  not   worth  while,"  said   Potter,  "   to   spill   so  much blood  for   such   a   trifle."  3d,   The   members  of   the   Orange   family are  permanently  excluded  from  power  in   Belgium  (168   votes against   28   Orangists).  4th,   This  Congress  is   empowered  to   make a   constitution  for   the   kingdom.

It   was  necessary  to   settle  at   once  three  practical  questions:  ist, To   choose  a   sovereign;  2d,   To   draw  up   a   constitution;  3d,   To announce  the   new  kingdom  to   Europe.

First.  For   the   choice  of   King,   the   Congress  at   first   hesitated between  the  Prince  of   Leuchtenberg,  son  of   Beauharnais,  the Austrian  Archduke  Charles,  and  the   Duke  de   Nemours,  son  of Louis  Philippe.  On  the  second  ballot,  in   February,  1831,   it elected  the   Duke  de   Nemours;  the  vote  stood  Nemours  97, Leuchtenberg  74,   Archduke  Charles  21.  Louis  Philippe  refused his   approval  of   his   son's  election.  The   Congress  then  elected  a Regent,  Baron  Surlet  de   Chokier,  who  assumed  the   government until   a   King   should  be   elected.  Presently  the   French  and   English governments  agreed   to   propose  Leopold  of   Coburg,  who was  elected  by   152   votes  against   44.

Second.  During  the   long   negotiations  respecting  the   choice  of a   King,   the   Congress  adopted  the   constitution.  This  was   in   two parts ;   one  providing  for   the   organization  of   the   government,  the other  laying   down  principles  of   constitutional  law.

The  government  was  organized  on  the   parliamentary  system, as   represented  by   the   principles  of   the   English   Whigs.  The   sovereignty belongs   to   the   people,   not  to   the   King.   "   All   the powers  emanate  from  the  nation.  The  King  has  no  powers other  than   those  formally  assigned  to   him   by   the   constitution  and and   laws  made  in   accordance  with  it."  As   a  confession  of   his subordination  to   the   people,   the   King   must  make  the   following oath   before  taking   possession  of   the   crown:  "   I   swear  to   observe he   constitution  and   laws  of   the   Belgian  people,   to   maintain  the national  independence  and  the   integrity  of   the   territory."  The King   has   the   executive  power,  but  he   can  exercise  it   only hrough  ministers.  The  ministers  are  appointed  by   him,   but :hey   are  responsible  to   the   Chambers,  and   in   practice   this   responsibility is   interpreted  as  political  rather  than  legal,   flie   constitution promised  a   law   regulating  the   responsibility  of   ministers  and the   procedure  for   enforcing  it;   but   no  such  law   was  passed   till 1870,   and   the   one  then  passed   was  practically  needless.  The ministers  resign   when  they   have  no   longer   a  majority  in   the

Chamber;  this  makes  the  Chamber  the  ruling  power,  and  no statute  could  add   to   the   effectiveness  of   its   control.  The  legislature is   composed  of   two  houses - the   Senate  and  the   Chamber of   Deputies.  Both  are  elected  by   the   same  voters  and   have  the same  legal   powers;  but   the   Senators  must  be   men  of   property, paying  at   least  two  thousand  florins  in   taxes.  Every   tax  and every   levy   of   troops  must  be   voted,   in   the   first   instance,  by   the House  of   Representatives.  Every   statute  must  be   accepted  by both  houses  and  the   King,   and   all   three  'have  the   right   of   proposing changes   of   law.   Senators  and   Representatives  are  paid for   their  services.  To   be   a   voter  it   was  necessary  to   pay   taxes to   the   amount  of   at   least   20   florins  ($8.00) - a   requirement  which appeared  very  small  at   that  epoch.

The  constitution  decreed  that  there  should  be   communal  and provincial  councils  to   administer  local  affairs.  These  were  to   be elected  by   the   taxpayers - the   qualifying  amount  being   smaller than  in   the   case  of   national  voters.  They   were  to   have  about the   same  powers  as   the   municipal  and   general  councils  have  had in   France  since  1871.  In   those  days   of   centralization  their powers  were  thought  extensive.

The  principles  of   public   law   established  by   the   Congress  rest on  the  doctrine  of   complete  liberty,  accepted  equally  by   the leaders  of   both  the   Catholic  and   the   Liberal  parties.  The  constitution guaranteed   all   the   liberties  : liberty   of   the   person,  of   residence, of   the   press,  of   meeting  and  association,  of   worship,  of education,  of   language.  A   Catholic  protested  against   the   restriction "   saving  the  responsibility  for  writings  that  violate  the rights   of   society."  "   Under  this   clause,"  said   he,   "   Abbe  Lamennais   could  not   have  given   the   human  race   his   letters  of   liberation, his   chapters  on   liberty,  which  were  against  rights   claimed  by society." When  the   position  of   the   Church  was  to   be   settled  some  of   the liberals  proposed  to  place   it   under  government  control.  The Catholic  liberals  protested;  Nothomb  said:  "We  have  come  to one  of   those  epochs   which  occur  only   once  in   the   life   of   a   nation; let   us   take   advantage  of   it.   We   have  a  chance  to   exercise  a glorious  initiative  and  to  consecrate  unreservedly  one  of   the greatest  principles  of   modern  civilization.  For  centuries  there have  been  two  contending  powers,  civil  power  and  ecclesiastical power.  They  fought  for   the   control  of   society   as   if   the   empire   of the   one  excluded  that   of   the   other.  It   is   this   conflict  that   we  are called  on  to  stop.   There  are  two  worlds  before  us,   the   civil

rid   and   the   religious  world,  they   coexist  without  blending, hey   have  no  point   of   union.  Civil  law   and   religious  law   are   disinct,   each   has   its   domain.  .   .   There  is   no  more  connection  beween  the  state  and  religion  than  between  the  state  and geometry.  .  .   Let   us  signalize  our  transition  by   a  grand   principle; let   us  proclaim  the   separation  of   the   two  powers."  This separation  was  established  in   Belgium  according  to  an  original system.  The  Church  was  separated  from  the   state  in   so-   far   as he   lay   portion   of   society   have   no  power  over  the   clergy ; the   Belgian bishops   are   directly   installed  by   the   Pope   and   appoint   the )arish  priests   without  interference  on   the   part   of   the   government. But   the   Church  retained  the   privileges  which  the   state  recognised Before  the   separation,  the   right   held   by   all   religious  bodies  of   receiving an   appropriation  from  the   state,  exemption  from  military service   for   clergymen,  the   right   to   military   honours  in   ceremonies, the   possession  of   cemeteries,  and   the   right   of   overseeing religious  instruction  in   the   schools.  The  separation  freed  the Church  of   its   burdens  and   left   it   its   privileges.

Third.  The  recognition  of   the   Kingdom  of   Belgium  was  a   long and  delicate  operation.  It   depended  at   once  on   King   William and  the   five   great   powers  who  had  taken  the   Kingdom  of   the Netherlands  under  their  guarantee.  The  King   was  unwilling  to give   up   Belgium  and   prepared  to   reconquer  it.   Belgium,  having no  regular  army,  would  have  been  unable  to   defend  itself  alone, even  against  the   army  of   Holland;  it   was  at   the   mercy  of   the great   powers.  Their  disunion  was  its   salvation;  the   three  absolutist eastern  powers  wished  to   support   William  in   maintaining the   treaties  of   1815   and   in   crushing  the   revolution.  The  two liberal  powers  of   the   west  sympathized  with  the   Belgians - the French  to   destroy   the   unpopular  treaty  of   1815   and   to   show  their power,  the   English  to   keep   the   mouth  of   the   Scheldt  from  falling into   the   power  of   France.  The  two  western  powers  had  better opportunity  for   action  and   were  more  free   to   act.  They   secured the   decision  that   each   of   the   five   powers  should  send   an  agent   to a   conference  in   London  to   settle  the   Belgian   question.

The  London  Conference  settled  the   fate  of   Belgium,  and  the Belgian   Congress  could  only   submit.  It   had   to   settle  three  important questions  :   the   independence  of   Belgium,  the   frontier  between Belgium   and   the   Netherlands,  and   the   division  of   the   debt between  the   two  governments,  besides  a  number  of   smaller  questions :   navigation  of   the   Scheldt,  demolition  of   the   fortresses  constructed against   France,   and   indemnity  to   the   Germanic  Con-

federation  for   Luxemburg.  It   was  not   long   in   declaring  for   independence : but   on   the   other  questions  its   decisions  were  guided by   diplomatic  motives.  It   adopted  successively  three  sets  of   decisions (January   20,   1831,   June   26,   October  15).   The   last,   the   24 Articles,  was  the   least  advantageous  for   Belgium,  obliging  her   to give   up   part   of   Luxemburg  and  Limburg.  The  Belgian  Congress accepted   the   decision  with  great   lamentation,  and  the powers  recognised  the   kingdom  by   declaring  it   neutral  (February, 1832). gress

King   William  refused  to   accept  the   decision.  At   the   expiration of   the   armistice  of   November,  1830,   which  the   powers  had imposed  on   him,   he   had   begun   the   war  again   (August,  1831)   and routed  the   two   Belgian  armies  ; Leopold  had  called  France  to   his assistance,  and  it   was  a   French  army  that  delivered  Belgium. But  the   Dutch  army,   in   retreating,  had  retained  Antwerp.  It was  again   a   French  army  which  in   1832   besieged  and   took  Antwerp; it   worked  without  a   declaration  of   war,  as  an  army  of execution  charged  with  carrying  out  the  decisions  of   the conference.

After  the   fall   of   Antwerp,  the   Dutch  retained  only   two   forts   on the   Scheldt,  and   the   King   stubbornly  refused  to   give   them  up. Belgium,  on   her   part,   kept   the   bits   of   Limburg  and   Luxemburg which  the   London  Conference  had  granted  to   Holland.  When in   1839   William  finally   decided  to   demand  an  exchange,  the   Belgian Chamber  at   first   tried   to   resist,   but   in   the   face   of   the   threatening powers   it   yielded  with  many  protests.

Thus  the   independence  of   Belgium  was  proclaimed  in   principle by   the   Belgian   insurgents  and   established  in   fact   by   France,  with the   official  consent  of   the   great   states  of   Europe.

## THE    KINGDOM    OF    THE    NETHERLANDS    SINCE  1830.

The  Constitution  of   1848. - The  Kingdom  of   the   Netherlands, reduced  to   the   former  United  Provinces,  had   at   first   only   a   sleepy political  life.  The  personal  government  of   the   King   continued until  1848.  Politics  were  confined  to  the   Belgian  conflict  and the   financial  difficulties.  The  war  and   the   King's   personal  expenses had   increased  the   debt   by   375,000,000  florins  in   10   years. The  press  remained  subject  to   the   system  of   repression  organized against  the   Belgian  papers.

William  I.,   who  had  become  very  unpopular,  abdicated  in 1840:   he   wished  to   marry  a   Catholic,  a   maid  of   honour  to   the   late

Jueen.      His   son   William  II.   dismissed  his   father's  ministry,  but reserved  the   same  system.     The  malcontents  formed  a  small iberal  party   in   the   second  Chamber.     Their  leader,  Thorbecke, &gt;rofessor  of   public   law   at   Ley   den,   took   the   initiative  in   demandng   a   revision  of   the   constitution  in   1844.      The   King   at   first   reused.    But   in   1847   the   agitation   became  more  active,   and   in 848   the   King,   doubtless  affected  by   the   revolutions  of   Europe, ^pointed  in   addition  to   his   ministry  a   commission  charged  with le   preparation  of   a   plan   of   revision;  Thorbecke  and   three  other liberals  were  members  of   it.     Then  the   King   convoked  the   StatesGeneral,  with   a   double  number  of   deputies,  to   act   on   the   revision. They   adopted  the   new   fundamental  law,   and   it   was  promulgated in   November,  1848.

The  revision  of   1848   was  chiefly   concerned  with  the   method  of recruiting  the   States-General  and  with  their  rights.  The  first Chamber,  instead  of   being   appointed  by   the   King,   is   elected  by the   provincial  estates;  the   second  Chamber  is   chosen  by   direct , election  of   persons  who  pay  a   direct  tax,   varying  according  to locality   from  160   to   20   florins.  The  deputies  receive  a  salary. The   second  Chamber  is   elected  for   four  years  renewed  by   halves biennially:  but   the   King   can   dissolve  the   whole  at   any   time.  The i  powers  of   the   second  Chamber  are  much  increased;  it   has   the right   to   propose   laws   and   to   amend  bills   proposed  by   the   govern,ment.  The  ministers  are   declared  responsible  before  the   Statess General.

The   fundamental  law   of   1848   recognised  the   rights   of   provinces nd   communes.  Each  of   the   eleven  provinces  *   has   its   provincial states,   elected  by   the   same  voters  as   the   second  Chamber,  for   9 ·ears,  renewed  by   thirds  triennially;  the  members  receive  a alary.  They   are  occupied  chiefly   with  roads  and   canals.  Each ommune  has  its   council  elected  for   6   years,  renewed  by   thirds the   property  qualification  for   communal  electors  is   one-half  of hat   for   political   electors),   its   aldermen  elected  by   the   communal ouncil,   and   its   burgomaster  appointed  by   the   government.  The 'olice   is   their   chief   province.  The   decisions  of   all   authorities  are ubmitted  to   the   government,  which  may  annul  them.

The   constitution  also  acknowledges  the   right   of   communities o   levy   taxes  and   make  regulations  for   the   maintenance  of   dikes md   waterlocks  (Waterschappen).

*   To   the   7   former  United  Provinces  have  been  added  3   formerly  subject ountries,  Drenthe,  Brabant,  Limburg  ;   and  Holland  had  been  divided nto   two   parts.

The  Parties  since  1848. - With  the   constitution  of   1848   begins the   political   life   of   the   Netherlands.  The   responsibility  of   ministers before   the   Chambers  is   not   interpreted  as  strictly   as   in Belgium.  The  King  retains  in   practice  a  portion  of   his   personal power.   He   has   even   been   known  to   take   a   ministry   from the   minority  when  the   majority  was   feeble  and   divided.  But   before a   clear  majority  he   has   always   yielded.  Custom  has   inclined more  and  more  toward  the   parliamentary  system.

In   the   Netherlands  parties   are  chiefly   religious,  formed  on  the question  of   public   schools.  The  Constitution  of   '48   established the   principle  that  the   state  should  provide  free  primary  education ; it   recognised  for   all   creeds  the   liberty   of   establishing  private schools,  but   the   public   schools  must  remain  neutral.

The  Catholics  compose  at   least  a   third  of   the   whole  population of   the   Netherlands  and  almost  the   whole  population  of   the southern  provinces  (Brabant  and  Limburg).  Accustomed  to follow  the   direction  of   their  clergy,   they   have  constituted  a   compact political   party.   The  Protestants  have  divided  into  two parties,   the   Orthodox,  who  favour  Calvinistic  education,  and   the Liberals,  who  favour  non-sectarian  education.  The   orthodox  have been  the   nucleus  of   the   Conservative  party,  which  calls  itself  antirevolutionary;  but   they   have  been  re-enforced  by   the   partisans  of the   regime   existing  prior   to   1848,   that  is   to   say,  of   the   government of   officials,  King,   and  aristocracy.  The  upper   Chamber is   controlled  by   manufacturers  and  capitalists;  the   second Chamber  is   composed  of   men  who  represent  the   average  opinion of   small  traders  and  small  landowners.  The  labouring  classes are  excluded  from  the   right   of   voting. ber

Since  1840   the   Liberal  party,  which  is   the   party   of   the   cities  in Holland,  has  had  an  almost  uninterrupted  majority,  and  has usually  held  the   ministry;  but   at   different  times  it   has   been  so weakened  by   divisions  that  the   King   has   been  enabled  to   follow his   personal  preference  by   taking   Conservative  ministers.

The  Catholic  party   began   by   working  with  the   Liberals,  who favoured  religious  liberty,  which  the   Orthodox  party  was  threatening. In   1853,   when  the   Pope   created  the   official  organization of   the   Church  in   the   Netherlands  (an   archbishop  at   Utrecht  and four  bishops,  one   for   Holland,  two   for   Brabant,  and   one   for   Limburg), the   Orthodox  party   protested.  The   Liberal  ministry  declared it   impossible  to   hinder  the   Catholics  from  organizing,  and confined  itself  to   proposing  a   law   which  gave   the   government  the1 right   to   supervise  the   parishes.  When  it   was  finally   decided  to

organize  the   primary  instruction  promised  by   the   Constitution  of 1848,   the   Catholics  voted  with  the   Liberals  to   establish  the   law   of 1857,   obliging  every  commune  to  maintain  non-sectarian  public schools.  The  public  school  was  not  to   give   any   denominational instruction;  its   aim   was  to   be   simply   to   "   develop   the   intellectual faculties  of   the   children  and   educate  them  in   all   the   virtues,  both Christian  and   social."  The  master  must  "   not   do   or  permit   anything contrary  to   the   respect  which  is   due   to   the   religious   feelings of   persons  of   another  faith."  The  commune  pays  the   expenses of   the   public   school  and   appoints  the   masters;  it   has   the right   to   levy   a   school  tax;   education  is   neither  gratuitous  nor compulsory.  The  government  makes  good   a  part   of   the   expense and   appoints  the   inspectors. ings

The  Orthodox  Protestants  and  Catholics,  who  object   to   neutral education,  have  established  private  schools  of   their  own creeds  (statistics  of   1890   show  about  3000  public   schools  with 450,000  scholars,  against  1300  private  schools  with  195,000 scholars).  The  Catholic  party   has   re-enforced  its   organization in   the   Catholic  districts;  the   communal  councils  have  employed their  right   of   choosing  teachers  and  to   supervise  education  in such  ways  as  to.  transform  the  public  schools  into  Catholic schools.  The  clause  of   the   law   forbidding  any   teaching  offensive to   any   religious   body   has   been   in   some  cases  interpreted  in   such manner  as   to   cut  out   from  the   list   of   studies  the   history   of   the Reformation  and  the   wars  against   Spain.

The   Catholic  party,   now   become  stronger,  joined   the   Orthodox party   against   the   Liberals  to   repeal   the   law   of   1857   and   establish denominational  public  schools.  The  attempt  began   in   1868.  A onservative  ministry  re-established  separate  government  departments for   Catholics  and   Protestants.  The  bishops  issued  a   manifesto against   the   school  law,   adjuring   parents  to   leave  their   children without  instruction  rather  than  send  them  to   the   nonsectarian  school.  This  attack  has  been  several  times  renewed. The   Liberals  retorted  with  the   law   of   1878   which  maintained  the principle  of   non-sectarianism  in   the   same  form  as   in   1857,   increased the   salaries  of   teachers,  and   made  the   government  responsible for   30   per   cent,  of   the   expenses.

The   Liberal  party,  united  to   support  the   non-sectarian  schools, divided  on  other  questions:  colonial  policy,   military  reform,  and extension  of   the   right   of   voting.

First.   The   system   imposed  on   the   natives  of   the   Dutch  Indies, especially  in   Java,   produced  benefits  for   the   mother  country;

since  1850   the   government  had  been  in   the   habit  of   balancing the   budget   by   means  of   the   colonial  surplus,  and   it   had   paid   off a   portion  of   the   old   debt.  In   1873   began   the   war  against   the hostile  people   of   Atje,   in   Sumatra,  which  is   still   going   on,   and   involves heavy   military   expenditures.  From  that   date   the   colonial budget  has   yielded,   not  a   surplus,   but   a   deficit  which,   added  to   the deficit  of   the   home  government,  amounts  on  an  average  to   from 4,000,000  to   6,000,000  florins.  It   has   been  found  impossible  to agree  on   the   creation  of   new  taxes  to   restore  the   equilibrium,  and so   loans  have  been  resorted  to   (1886,   1891).  The  policy   of   the colonial  war,  and  the   deficit  which  it   involved,  have  become  a favourite  ground  for   the   attacks  of   the   opposition.

Second.  The  army  was  recruited  by   enlistment,  to   which  was added  in   1861  enrollment  by   drafting  with  right   of   substitution; the  national  guard,  the   Schutterij,  has  been  preserved  in   the cities.  After  1870,   under  the   influence  of   the   general  reform movement  in   the   armies  of   Europe  and   the   fear   of   a   German  invasion, a  party  was  formed  to   demand  the   abolition  of   drafting and  substitution,  and  the  establishment  of   universal  military service  as   in   Prussia,  with   a   reserve  in   place   of   the   national  guard. But  the   movement  met  with  stout  resistance  from  the   clergy   and the   well-to-do  classes,  which  controlled  the   States-General,  and the   ministerial  plan   of   1891   was  rejected   in   1893.   The   Chamber voted  the   principle  of   personal  service,  but   the   Catholics  defeated the   passage  of   the   law   and   caused  the   fall   of   the   Conservative ministry  which  had  proposed  it.

Third.  Extension  of   suffrage  was  demanded  as  early   as  1872 by   a   portion   of   the   Liberals.  But   it   could  not   be   accomplished  ; except   by   a   revision  of   the   constitution.  The   government  waited years   before  presenting  the   plan ; the   States-General  were  slow  in , discussing  it;   the   revision,  proposed  in   1880,   was  not  voted  until 1887.  It   extended  the   right   of   voting   to   all   those  who  could fulfil   the   educational  and  property  qualifications.  This  designedly vague   formula  has   allowed  the   increase  of   the   number  of voters  from  135,000  to   350,000.  The  lower  House,  numbering 100  members,  is   renewable  in   full   every   fourth  year,   instead  oi being   renewed  by   halves  every  second  year,  as   before.

A   small  socialist  party   has   been  formed  under  a  very  active leader,  a   former  pastor,   Domela-Nieuwenhuis  ; it   was  recruited  ir the  large   cities,   and  in   Frisia,  among  the   country  labourers and  demanded  universal  suffrage  and  the   abolition  of   the   uppe: Chamber.  There  have  been  two  riots  in   Amsterdam.

Liberals  have  divided  on  the   suffrage  question;  the   majority has   supported  the   Tak   ministry,   which  proposed  to   extend the   right   of   voting   to   all   who   could  read  and   write.  The  dissenters, joining   the   Conservatives  and   Catholics  after   the   dissolution in   1893,   secured  a   majority  in   coalition  which  took  the   ministry in   1894.   This  ministry  succeeded  in   1896   in   passing   an  electoral law   which   grants   suffrage   to   most  taxpayers.  The  total number  of   voters  is   estimated  at   over  600,000. istry

The  nineteenth  century  has   been  a   time  of   prosperity  for   the Netherlands.  The  population  has  increased  from  2,600,000  in in   1829   to   4,600,000  in   1891.

Luxemburg. - The  powers  of   Europe,  when  creating  the   Kingdom of   the   Netherlands,  had  given   Luxemburg  a  special  and complex  position.  While  all   the   other  Belgian  provinces  had been  ceded  to   the   King   of   the   Netherlands  "   as  an   increase  of   territory," Luxemburg  had   been   given   to   him   as   indemnity  for   the German  domains  of   the   Orange-Nassau  family,  which  had  been annexed  to   Prussia.  It   was  set  up   as  the  Grand  Duchy  of Luxemburg,  hereditary  in   the   Orange-Nassau  family   in   the   order of   male   succession,  and   made  a   part   of   the   Germanic  Confederation. The   city   of   Luxemburg  was  made  a   federal  fortress,  with a   Prussian  garrison,  and   the   King   of   the   Netherlands  granted   to Prussia  the  right   of   appointing  the  military  governor.  The Grand  Duchy  became  a   state  of   the   Germanic  Confederation,  atached  to   the   Netherlands  by   a   personal  union  alone.

But  the   King   of   the   Netherlands,  sovereign  of   Luxemburg, created  it   as  a   province  of   his   kingdom,  applying  to   it   the   Constiution  of   1815   and  the   Dutch  laws.  Provincial  estates  were &gt;rganized  after  an  aristocratic  system  in   three  orders:  knights, itizens,   and   members  for   the   rural  districts.  These  were  elected ndirectly  by   propertied  voters,  and  chose  the   deputies  to   the States-General.  They   had,   beyond  this,   little  more  than  a   conultative  function.  The  country  was  in   fact   governed  by   Dutch ifficials.

The  Revolution  of   1830   cut   Luxemburg  in   two.      The   city, rhich   was  occupied  by   the   Prussian  garrison,  alone  remained ubject   to   the   King.      All   the   rest  of   the   country  revolted,  joined Belgium,  and  was  incorporated  in   the   new   kingdom.     Only   one art   remained  Belgian  definitively.*     Another  part,   the   smallest,

*   In   exchange  for   the   bit   of   Luxemburg  which  was  taken  from  the Germanic  Confederation,  Limburg  was  made  a   duchy  and  entered  the Confederation.

was  restored  to   the   King   of   the   Netherlands  in   1839   and   reunited to   the   city;   this   is   the   existing   Grand  Duchy   of   Luxemburg. Belgian  rule  had   introduced  there  habits  of   self-government  and liberty   which  made  it   difficult  in   practice  to   return  to   the   former government,  so  the   King   gave   Luxemburg  a  separate  administration. In   1842   he   carried  it   into   the   German  Zollverein,  or customs  union,  against  the   wish  of   its   inhabitants.

In   1848   the   King   granted  the   Grand  Duchy   a   special   constitution modelled  on   that   of   Belgium,  with   a   responsible  government and   a   Chamber  directly  elected  by   the   propertied  voters (10-  franc  qualification).  As   a   part   of   the   Germanic  Confederation, Luxemburg  sent   deputies   to   the   Frankfort  Parliament.

During  the   general  reaction  against   revolution,  the   King   abrogated the   Constitution  of   1848   as  contrary  to   the   principles adopted  by   the   other  sovereigns  of   the   confederation.  He   gave it   instead  the   Constitution  of   1856,   which  raised  the   voting   qualification and   robbed   the   Chamber  of   almost  all   its   powers,   leaving it   only   the   right   to   vote  the   laws   and   new  taxes  proposed  by   the government.

After  the   dissolution  of   the   Germanic  Confederation,  the   King wished  to   sell   Luxemburg  to   France,  but   was  prevented  by   Germany. Prussia  withdrew  her  garrison,  and  the  position  of Luxemburg  was  arranged  by   an   international  convention  of   the powers  in   1867.   It   was   declared  a   sovereign,  neutral  state,   under the   guarantee  of   the   powers ; but   it   was   forbidden  to   have   an  army or  a   fortification.  The  King   granted  the   Constitution  of   1868, founded  on  the   same  liberal  principles  as   that   of   1848,   but   rendering the   government  practically  independent  of   the   vote  of   the Chamber.  Between  Luxemburg  and  the  Netherlands  there  remained only   a   personal   union.

In   1890   William  III.   being   dead,   his   daughter  inherited  the Kingdom  of   the   Netherlands.  But  the   Grand  Duchy   of   Luxemburg, hereditary  only   through   the   male   line,   passed   to   his   nearest agnate,  the  Duke  of   Nassau,  who  had  been  deprived  of   his Duchv  of   Nassau  by   Prussia  in   1866.

The  leading  political  question,  in   this   little  state,   is   that   of   languages: French   is   still   the   official  language,   but   the   majority   of the   inhabitants  speak   German  and  have  their  commercial  relations with   Germany,   and   the   reigning   family   is   German.

THE     KINGDOM     OF    BELGIUM.

Formation  of   Parties. - In   1830   all   the   Belgians  had   been united  against  foreign  rule.  But   the   parties,   which  had   joined   for

the   struggle,  separated  very  soon.  As   early   as  1831   a   group  of Liberals  established  a  newspaper,  the  Independence,  with  the motto:  independent  civil  power.  It   protested  against  the religious  liberty  adopted  by   the  Congress:  "The  Catholic religion  seems  to   us   by   nature  given   to   encroaching;  we   believe it   dangerous  and  continually  hostile  to  civil  society.  .   .   We deem  it   our   duty   to   watch  its   progress  and   resist  its   invasions." The  government  had  two  universities,  Ghent  in   the  Flemish provinces,  Liege   in   the   Walloon  provinces;  the   two  parties,  taking advantage  of   the   freedom  of   higher   education,  established each  a   free   university,  the   Catholics  at   Louvain,  the   Liberals  at Brussels.

In   the   first   years   of   the   kingdom   the   great   divergence  between Catholics  and  Liberals  did   not  take  a   distinctly  political  form; parties   were  formed  on  practical  questions.  Until  peace  was   declared with   Holland,  there  were  two  parties  - the   Greens,  who favoured  war,  and   the   Ripes,   who   favoured  peace.  The   war  party wished  to   keep   Luxemburg  in   defiance  of   the  powers.  The Chambers  were  busy   with  the   organization  of   local  administration and   the   settlement  of   the   finances.  Belgium  found  herself at   once   burdened  with   a   part   of   Holland's  debt   and   impoverished by   the   rupture  of   relations  with  Holland.  She  went  through a   terrible  crisis : in   1839   tne   Bank  and   the   Savings   Bank  failed.

The  government  sought  to   keep   itself  free   from  party   control. The   ministries  succeeded  each  other  rapidly.     But   the   King   systematically avoided   a   party   ministry.      He   chose  men  of   moderate opinions,   or  even   combined  representatives   of   opposite tendencies  (the   Nothomb  ministry - 3   Catholics  and   3 Liberals). It   was  at   this   time  that   the   English  theory   of   the   eighteenth entury  was  admitted,  that   the   sovereign  should  keep   the   government from   falling   into   the   hands  of   a   single   party,   and   that   the ministry  must  be,   not   homogeneous,  but  impartial,  without  a olicy.     .     .     The   Minister  of   Justice   in    1840   protested  against he   "   fatal   divisions  of   opinion   that   always   entail  opposing  paries."    He   condemned  "   the   division  into   Catholics  and   Liberals as  one  without  meaning  in   the   presence  of   the   great   principles erate liberty   consecrated  by   our  constitution." These  peaceful  intentions  ceased  when  the   Catholics,  in   the name  of   religious  liberty,  carried  the   Education  Act   of   1842. The  prime  minister,  Nothomb,  a   Catholic  Liberal,  summed  it tip   as   follows:  "   No   primary   schools  without  moral  and   religious nstruction.  We  break  with  the  philosophical  doctrines  of   the

eighteenth  century,  which  pretended  to   secularize  education  and to   constitute  society  on  purely  rationalistic  bases."  Religious education  was  declared  compulsory  in  public  schools  and intrusted  to   the   Church,  the   government  reserving  to   itself  only the   right   of   supervision.  This  division  was  regarded  by   the deputies  as  a   satisfactory  settlement  and   the   bill   was  passed   unanimously, with   the   exception   of   3   votes.

The  Liberals,  dissatisfied  with  the   new  law,   sought   to   organize themselves  to   resist  the   clergy.   Their  leader  was  Defacqz, the   Grand  Master  of   the   Belgian   Free  Masons.  In   1841   he   had founded,  with  the  Liberals  of   every  shade  from  the   Orangists to   the   Democrats,  a   political  society,   the   Alliance,  having   for   its program  the   extension  of   the   suffrage  and   a  series  of   fiscal  and judicial   reforms.  After  the   passage  of   the   law   of   1842   the   Liberals formed  local   societies  all   over  Belgium,  and   in   1846   the Alliance  convoked  a  congress  of   the   Liberal  societies  at   the   City Hall  in   Brussels.  Three  hundred  and  twenty  delegates  were present.  The  congress,  under  the   presidency  of   Defacqz,  decided to   establish  permanent  Liberal  associations  in   the   cantons  and adopted  a  platform  for   the   Liberal  party.  Of   the   reforms  which were  demanded,  two  in   particular  marked  the   tendencies  of   the party:  I.   "Extension  of   the   suffrage  by   the   continuous  lowering of   the   property  qualification  down  to   the   minimum  set   by   the constitution":  2.   "The  organization  of   public   schools  of   all   grades under  the   exclusive  direction  of   the   civil  authorities,  by   giving them  the  constitutional  means  to  compete  with  the  private establishments,  and  taking   away   from  the   clergy   the   legal   right to   interfere  with   the   instruction  provided  by   the   state."  The   suffrage and   the   schools  have   been   from   that   time   to   the   present day   the   two  great   political   questions  in   Belgium.

The  King,   being   unable  to   make  terms  with  the   Liberals,  had just   formed,  in   March,  1846,   a   ministry  composed  of   Catholics. This  ministry  tried,   in   1847,   to   carry  a   law   on  secondary  schools. The  Liberals  excited  demonstrations  against  it   in   the   large   cities. Louis  Philippe  advised  his   son-in-law,  Leopold,  to   "   paralyze, strike  down,  annihilate  that  audacious  society  [the   liberal  Alliance] and   by   all   means  to   maintain  his   ministry."  Leopold preferred  to  yield   to  public   opinion  as  shown  in   the   cities; he   took  a   ministry  made  up   altogether  of   Liberals  (August, 1847).

Struggles  between  Catholics  and   Liberals. - Since  1847   'lt   nas been  the   constant  practice  in   Belgium  to   choose  a   homogeneous

ministry  from  the   party   in   majority  in   the   Chamber.  Voters  and members  have  grouped  themselves  in   two  parties,  Catholics  and ^iberals,  permanently  opposed  to  each  other.  They   struggle against   each  other  in   elections  of   all   sorts:  for   the   Senate,   for   the Chamber,  for  the  provincial  councils,  and  for   the  communal councils.  They   contend  for   possession  of   the   ministry  and   in   votng   laws  on  every  question  which  concerns  the   authority  of   the Church:  education,  public   charities,  cemeteries,  civil  marriage,  or diplomatic  relations  with  the   Pope.  The  Catholics  contend  in the   name  of   "   the   liberty   of   the   Church,"  the   Liberals  in   the name  of   the   "   independence  of   the   civil   power."  The   Catholics control  all   the   Flemish  provinces  inhabited  by   peasants,  Flanders, Antwerp,  Limburg,  and  a  part  of   Brabant.  -The  Liberals' strength  lies   in   the   manufacturing  Walloon  provinces,  Brussels, Hainaut,  and  the   Liege   district.  Antwerp  and  Ghent,  the   two commercial  cities  of   the   Flemish  provinces,  and   Namur  and   Luxemburg, in   the   agricultural  region   of   the   Walloons,  are  politically doubtful.  Victory   in   these  doubtful  regions   usually   insures success.

Since  1847   the   two  parties   have  been  alternately  in   power. Three  times  the   Liberals  have  'had  control:  August,  1847,   to March,  1855;   November,  1857,   to   July,   1870;   June,   1878,   to June,   1884  - twenty-eight  years   in   all.  Their  leader  has   been Frere  Orban,  member  from  Liege.  The  Catholics  have  been  in power:  March,  1855,   to   November,  1857;   July,   1870,   to   June, 1878;   and   since  1884  - twenty-three  years  up   to   1896.   Their leader  was   Malou,  who  died  in   1886.  This  see-saw  system  has the   appearance  of   parliamentary  government,  but  the   position of   the   parties   is   totally   different.  The  English  Whigs  and Tories,  separated  by   secondary  differences,  agree   in   upholding the   constitution,  which  makes  courteous  relations  possible.  In Belgium  Catholics  and  Liberals  disagree  even  in   their  conception of   society;  the   contest  is   not   between  two  political  parties, but   between  two  societies  brought  up   side   by   side   in   opposing principles.  The  contest  lets  loose  hot  religious  passions  and bitter   hatreds  both  in   Parliament  and   in   the   press.   It   breaks out   in   street  demonstrations,  which  sometimes  lead  to   fisticuffs. It   has   been   feared  that   the   constitution  could  not   hold   out   against these   agitations,  and   that   liberty   would  be   suppressed  by   the   victorious party.   In   reality,   thanks  to   the   common  sense  and   natural tolerance  of   the   Belgians,   the   struggle   has   been   kept   within the   limits  of   the   constitution  and   liberty.  It   has   not   kept   the

country  from  increasing  its   wealth  and  population  in   unprecedented proportions.*

The  Catholic  party   has   had   no  need   to   create  a   special   organization for   itself;   its   leaders  are   the   bishops,   its   staff   the   parish clergy,   its   program  the   decisions  of   the   Church.  As   the   LiberalCatholics  of   1830   have  died   out   the   party   has   discarded  the   liberal doctrine  set   forth  in   the   constitution,  which  had   been   condemned by   Pope   Gregory  XVI.  in   1832^   and   by   Pius  IX.   in   the   encyclical of   1864.  The  Liberal  party   had   never  been  anything  more than  a   coalition  of   the   opponents  of   the   Catholic  party.   Their  sole ground  of   union  was   hostility   to   the   clergy.  When  it   was  a   question of   ousting  the   Catholics  from  power,  the   Liberals  organized themselves  strongly,  but  after  the   victory  the   party  was  weakened by   dissensions  on  other  questions.  It   had  the   advantage of   rousing   the   inhabitants  of   the   great   cities,   the   working   classes, and  the   Walloons,  who  were  more  active  and  more  turbulent than  the   Flemish  peasants.

The  Liberals  have  been  long   in   power.  From  1847   to  1870 they   were  in   power  20  years.  The  Liberal  ministry  which  was in   office   in   1848   kept   Belgium   out  of   the   revolutionary  movement except  for   an   insignificant  affray.  A   law   passed   in   1848   lowered the   tax-paying  qualification  to   the   minimum  set   by   the   constitution, 20   florins,  and  declared  all   office-holders  ineligible. Later  the   Liberal  party  regulated  the   secondary  schools  by   the law  of   1850;   it   refused  to   recognise  the   right   of   the   clergy   to supervise  these  schools.  But   the   bishops,  to   secure  this   right   for themselves,  resorted  to   the   arrangement  known  as   the   Antwerp Convention;  as  religious  instruction  can  be   given   only   by   the clergy   and   with   the   permission  of   the   bishop,   it   was  agreed,   when a   city   asks   for   a   chaplain  for   its   high   school,  to   ask   in   return that   it   shall   promise   to   subject   its   schools  to   Church  supervision, and   exclude  from  its   high   school  ministers  of   other  beliefs.

The  Liberal  party  weakened  itself  by   levying  new  taxes  and lost   its   majority.  The  Catholic  party  gained  the   ministry  in 1855.  In   1857   it   wished  to   carry  a   law   to   establish  "   the   liberty of   charity,"  which  is   the   right   of   establishing  charitable  institutions to   be   administered  by   the   clergy,   or,   as   the   bill   said,   admin-

be   guaranteed  to   all."

istered  by   "   persons   designated  from  time  to   time  to   fill   certain ecclesiastical  or  civil   offices."  The   Liberals  were  aroused,  insulted the   Catholics,  and   broke  out   in   riots.  The   King   at   first   declared that   he   would  support  the   ministry  of   the   majority.  But,   the communal  elections  having  turned  in   favour  of   the   Liberals,  the King  formed  a   Liberal  ministry,  which  dissolved  the   Chamber and  secured  a  strong  majority,  70   against  38.

The  Liberals  kept   the   power  13   years,   during   which  time  they accomplished  several  practical  reforms :   suppression  of   the   octroi, 1860;  revision  of   the   penal   and  commercial  codes,  freedom  of association,  reduction  of   railroad  rates.  But   in   this   period   they divided,  principally  on  the   suffrage  question.  The  Young  Liberals, later   called   the   Progressists,  demanded  extended  suffrage, the   Radicals  even  demanded  universal  suffrage,*  while  the   old members  of   the   party,  the   Doctrinaires,  wished  to   maintain  the property  qualification.  The  Liberal  Alliance  broke  up;   the Doctrinaires  founded  the   Liberal  Union  in   support  of   the   ministry. There  was  disagreement  about  the   army  also;   the   Doctrinaires wished  to   retain  the   system  of   enrollment,  draft,   and   substitution  ; an   Anti-military  League   was   formed  at   Brussels  in   1868   to   replace the   army  with  a   militia.  In   addition  to   these  general  causes  of contention,  there  were  local  oppositions:  the  Flemings  demanded equality   of   Flemish  with  French  in   public   acts;  the Antwerp  Liberals  protested  against  the   new   fortifications,  which, as   they   said,   were  making   Antwerp  a   prison.  In   the   elections of   1870   the   Liberal  malcontents,  Anti-militarists,  and  Flemish Liberals  refused  to   vote;  a   number  of   Radicals,  it   was  said,   went so   far   as   to   vote  with   the   Catholics.

The  Catholic  party,  assisted  to   power   by   the   Democrats,  settled a   number  of   the   questions  which  divided  the   Liberals. Flemish  became  the  official  language  in   the   Flemish  provinces; correspondence  with  the   communes  and  with  individuals,  as  well as  criminal  procedure,  must  be   in   the   language  of   the   district.

*   These  new  ideas  of   the  younger  generations  in   Belgium  have  been attributed  to   the   influence  of   French  Republicans  who  took  refuge  there after  the  coup   d'etat.  To   their  influence  has  also  been  attributed  the Belgian  literary  revival  which  has  resulted  in   remarkable  productiveness for   so   small  a   nation.  Brussels  has   during   the   last   half   of   the   century   lost its   provincial  character  and  become  one  of   the  intellectual  centres  of Europe.  But  it   is   hard  to   tell   whether  this   movement  is   due   to   foreign  influence, or   to   the  exceptional  ability  of   the   Walloons  and  the   Flemings of   the   cities.

The  voting  qualification  was  reduced  to   20   francs  for   elections to  provincial  councils,  10   francs  in   the  case  of   communal councils.

This  was  the   time  of   the   struggle  between  the   Pope   and  the Kingdom  of   Italy,   between  the   clergy   and  the   government  in Germany.  The  Belgian  Catholics  favoured  the   re-establishment of   the   Pope's   temporal  power.  They   signed   petitions  demanding that   a   religious   marriage  should  precede   civil   marriage,  and organized  processions  and  pilgrimages.  The  Belgian  bishops denounced  the   governments  of   Italy   and   Germany.  In   1876,   at the   great   Catholic  banquet  at   Mechlin,  under  the   direction  of   the Archbishop-primate  of   Belgium,  the  Pope's  health  was  drunk before  that   of   the   King.   The   Catholic  ministry,  composed  partly of   former  Catholic  Liberals,  kept   out  of   these  demonstrations, and  even  declared  its   determination  to   uphold  the   constitution; in   1877   it   carried  a   vote  of   censure  against   an  address  sent   by the   pontifical  Zouaves  of   Belgium  to   the   nuncio.

To   contend  against  the   Catholic  agitation,  the   Doctrinaires  and Progressists  united  and  reorganized  the   Liberal  party.  In   1875 all   the   Liberal  societies  agreed   to   form  the   Liberal  Federation,  and hold  regular  meetings.  The  Flemish  Liberals  founded  a  review, the   Liberal  Flanders,  revived  the   name. of   Beggars,  which  had   formerly been   borne  by   the   Belgians   who   revolted  against   Spain, and  adopted  the   Gueuzenlied  or   Beggars'  Song.

The  Liberal  Federation  complained  that  the  clergy  forced electors  to   vote  for   their  candidates  by   watching  their  vote.  It demanded  an  investigation  into  the  means  of   assuring  rural voters  secrecy  of   the   ballot  (1876).  The  Catholic  ministry  decided, in   1877,   to   propose  a   ballot  law.  By   this   new  system,  copied from   the   English   ballot,   the   voter  receives  a   printed   ticket, and  goes  alone  into  the  electoral  booth,  where  he   marks  the name  of   his   candidate  with  a   cross.

In   1878   the   Liberals  regained  their  majority  in   the   Chamber (70   against   60),   and   with   it   the   ministry.

The  School  Law. - The  Liberal  party  remained  in   power  six years,   in   which  time  they   succeeded  in   establishing  primary schools  independent  of   the   Church.  At   first   they   created  a   special ministry  for   public   schools.  Then  they   carried  the   law   on  primary schools.  Every   commune  is   obliged  to   maintain  a   public school,  which  shall  be   free   to   poor  children  at   least.  The   commune appoints   the   teachers,  but   they   must  show  a   certificate  oi: proficiency;  the   State  appoints  the   inspectors  and   approves  thi

1-books.  "   Religious  instruction  is   relegated  to   the   care oi   families  and   the   clergy   of   the   various  creeds.  A   place   in   the school  may   be   put   at   their  disposal  where  the   children  may  receive religious   instruction  "   (Article   4).   Thus  religious  instruction ceased   to   be   compulsory,  but   the   schools  remained  open   for the   clergy   to   come  and   instruct  the   children.  This  arrangement was  not  enough  for   the   Catholics;  they   demanded  that  religious instruction  should  be   part   of   compulsory  primary  education. ceive

The  bishops  met  at   Mechlin  and  officially  condemned  the school  laws,   agreeing  to   take   ecclesiastical  measures  against   the masters  and  scholars  of   lay   schools.  The  children  should  be provisionally  admitted  to  communion  as   having  acted  without discernment;  but   absolution  should  be   refused  to   the   pupils   and teachers  of   normal  schools,  primary  teachers,  and  parents  who let   their   children  attend  "   schools  in   which  the   loss   of   the   soul cannot  be   prevented."  The  parish   priests   were  to   try   and   establish Catholic  schools.

All   over   Belgium  began   an  agitation  to   establish  private   Catholic schools  and   prevent  the   children  going   to   the   public   schools. The   clergy   gained   their  point,   especially  in   Flanders.  According to   the   calculations  of   the   Catholic  party   there  were   in   November, 1879,   only   240,000  pupils   in   the   state  schools  and   370,000   in   the private   schools,  and   in   1881  in   the   private   schools  63   per   cent, of   the   whole  school  population  (81   per   cent,  in   West  Flanders, 84   per   cent,   in   East   Flanders).

The  Belgian  government  has  no  direct  influence  over  the clergy,   for   the   bishops   are  appointed  by   the   Pope   and   control  the priests  of   their  dioceses.  The  ministry  therefore  addressed itself   to   the   Holy   See.  The   nuncio  replied   at   first   that   the   Pope had   urged   moderation  upon  the   bishops  and  that  in   protesting against   the   law   the   bishops   had   acted  on   their   own  responsibility. But   when  the   ministry  tried  to   represent  the   Pope's   attitude  as a   reprimand  of   the   Belgian   clergy,   it   received  a   flat   contradiction. It   then   publicly   accused  the   Holy   See   of   "   trickery,"  recalled  the Belgian  ambassador  from  the  papal   court,  and  dismissed  the nuncio  (1880).  The  rupture  between  the   government  and   clergy became  a  public  issue.  The  Chamber  accordingly  voted  an investigation  of   the   schools,  and  published  the   reports  of   the committee,  describing  the  sort  of   pressure  brought  to   bear on  teachers  and  parents  by   the  clergy,  and  showing  the insufficiency  of   the  education  given   by   the   parish   schools.

In   1883   the   Chamber  suppressed  the  salaries  of   400  vicars

or  chaplains  who  performed  no  real  service  as  vicars  but acted  as  teachers  in   the   Catholic  schools.  It   abolished  the privilege  of   theological  students  in   military  matters.  The Liberals  even  began  to  consider  means  of   hindering  the  increase of   convents  and  monasteries,  which  had  doubled  in   number and   membership  from  1846   to   1880.

But   the   Liberals  were  suffering  from  a   new  dissension  within the   party.  The  Progressists  in   1881  demanded  that  the   right   of voting   in   national  elections  should  be   granted  to   the   provincial electors  (see   p.   250).   This  the   Doctrinaires,  who  controlled  the ministry,  refused.  A   National  League  was  formed  to  promote an  extension  of   the   suffrage.  The  Radicals  in   the   Chamber  demanded a   revision  of   the   constitution  in   order  to   establish  universal suffrage;   this   was  rejected   by   113   votes  against   u.   The ministry  granted  only   an  extension  of   the   provincial  suffrage  to those  who  could  pass  an  educational  test. versal

The  government  had  also  caused  dissatisfaction  by   its   financial policy.   To   strengthen  the   public   schools  it   had   increased the   grant   for   primary  education  year   by   year  up   to   22,000,000. The  result  was  a   growing  deficit:  6,000,000  in   1881,   12,000,000  in 1882,  25,000,000  in   1883.   The  government  had  met  this  by means  of   a   loan,   and   in   1883   proposed  additional  taxes  on  alcohol and   tobacco  and   a   raising   of   the   customs  tariff.

The  discontent  was  so  general  that  at   the   partial   renewal  of 1884   only   3 Liberal  deputies  were  elected  against   66   Catholics. The  Catholic  party,  strongly  organized  to   oppose  the   school  law, suddenly  gained  a  majority  of   32   votes  in   the   Chamber.  The Catholic  ministry,  at  once  installed,  busied  itself  with  restoring sectarian  primary  education.  The  law  of   1884   authorized communes  to  maintain,  in   place   of   a  neutral  public  school,  a private  Catholic  school.  The  signature  of   20   fathers  of   families was  necessary  to  oblige   the   commune  to   keep   up   the   public school.  The  commune  got   the   right   to   include  in   its   curriculum religious  and   moral  instruction,  placing  it   at   the   beginning  or   the end   of   the   session  in   order  that   parents  who   objected  to   it   might be   able  to   keep   their  children  away   from  it.   Public  teachers whose  schools  were  closed  were  dismissed  with  an  allowance  of 750   francs.  Under  this   law,   in   all   the   districts  which  were  under clerical  control,  especially  in   Flanders,  the   public   schools  were suppressed  and  replaced  by   Catholic  schools  whose  teachers, whether  laymen  or  members  of   religious  orders,  are  not  requin to   pass   examinations  for   license.

Establishment  of   Universal  Suffrage. - Since  1884   the   Catholic &gt;arty   has   steadily   held   the   majority   *   and   the   ministry.     But   side )y   side   with   the   old   Liberal  opposition  has   arisen  a   democratic pposition  which  is   very  active  in   the   manufacturing  districts  of ,iege   and   Hainaut,  and   the   cities  of   Brussels  and   Ghent.     It   is onducted  by   parties   of   different  views,   united  only   to   secure  uniersal  suffrage - a   socialist  party   connected  with  the   German  soialists,   composed  chiefly   of   Flemish  workingmen,  having  for entres  the   Voorhuit  of   Ghent  and  the   Brussels  House  of   the People;  secondly,  a  revolutionary   Republican  party  composed chiefly   of   Walloons,  in   communication  with  the   French  Republicans, recruited  among   the   miners  and   workers  in   metals ; thirdly, a   Radical  party,   hostile  to   the   rule   of   the   property  holders  and to   the   military   draft.

In   1886,   during   the   economic  crisis,   the   revolutionists  organized strikes   and   demonstrations  at   Liege   and   in   the   coal   districts, which  resulted  in   an   insurrection:  mills  were  burned,  the   army was  sent  against   the   strikers,  and   a   hundred  or  more  were  killed. The  committee  charged  with  investigating  the  condition  of   the industrial  classes  pointed  out  as   legitimate  their  demand  for   compulsory personal   military   service.  The   King   desired  it   also   as   a means  of   strengthening  the   army,   but   the   Catholics,  who   had   defeated it   once  already  in   1872,   continued  to   oppose   it.   Contemporary with   the   campaign  for   universal  suffrage   was  the   Democrats' campaign   for   the   abolition  of   the   privilege   given   to   drafted men  of   finding   substitutes.

The  old  Liberal  parties  first  attempted  to  reconstitute  the union;   but   the   negotiations  fell   through  (1887);   the   Liberal  Association, the   Progressists,  demanded  that  suffrage  should  be   extended to   all   who  could  read  and   write;   the   Liberal  League,   the Doctrinaires,  refused.  The  opponents  of   the   Catholics  remained therefore  broken  up   into   three  sections,  divided  on   the   suffrage question.  The  old   Liberals,  under  Frere  Orban,  wished  to   keep the   property  qualification;  the  Progressists,  under  Janson, adopted,  at   the   Brussels  Congress  of   1887,   suffrage  for   all   who could  write;   while  the   Democrats  demanded  universal  suffrage.

Political  life   in   Belgium  has   since  then  centred  less   in   the sessions  of   the   Chamber,  where  the   Catholic  majority  is   assured, than   in   the   demonstrations  and   meetings  of   the   Democratic  parties. The   Progressists  have   joined   in   the   support  of   the   Radical

*In   1886  it   had   even  increased  it,   98   against   40;   between  1888  and   1892, however,  the   Liberals  regained  24   seats.

platform,  abolition  of   substitutes  in   the   army   (1889),   and   later universal  suffrage.  People  resigned  themselves  to   the   fact   that the   constitution  of   1831,   the   most  liberal  of   its   time,   did   not answer  the   conditions  of   political  life   60   years   later.  The   King himself  in   1890   expressed  the   wish  that   the   government  should take  the   initiative  in   proposing  a   revision  of   the   constitution.

The  Catholic  party,   in   order  to   put   an  end   to   the   trouble,  decided in   1891   to   accept  revision  in   principle.  In   a   population  of 6,000,000  souls  there  were  not  as  many  as  135,000  national voters;  it   was  therefore  generally  recognised  that  the   requirements for   voting   must  be   changed.  But   it   took  two  years to   agree  on   the   precise   changes   to   be   made.

The  Catholics  proposed  a   lodger   qualification,  as   in   England and  Holland;  the  Doctrinaires  an  educational  qualification;  the Progressists  would  have  nothing  less  than  universal  suffrage. After  a   year  of   discussion  and   negotiation  the   Senate  and   Chamber agreed   to   vote  the   revision  (1892),   and   both   houses  were   dissolved. The   Catholic  party   won  a  majority  once  more  (92 against  66),   but  not  the   two-thirds  majority  necessary  for   a change  in   the   constitution.  The   Chamber  rejected  all   the   propositions (February,   1893).   The   workingmen,  irritated  by   the   long delays,   threatened  a   general  strike  if   universal  suffrage  were  not voted,  and  trouble  began  again   in   Brussels.  The  militia  was called  out,   but   did   not  seem  inclined  to   march  against   the   workingmen.

The  Chambers  were  alarmed  and  determined  to   pass   the   Nyssens  project,  a  combination  of   the  systems  of   the  different parties   (1893).  The  new  electoral  law   established  plural   voting. It   gives   to   every  man  over  25   years  of   age   at   least   one  vote,   with the   right   to   additional  votes  on   fulfilment  of   any   of   the   following conditions:  1st,   head  of   a   family;   2d,   possessor  of   real   estate  or a   savings-bank  deposit   to   the   extent  of   2000  francs;  3d,   graduate of   a   high   school.  No   one  can   have  more  than  3   votes.  (For   the Senate  75   senators  are  elected  by   voters  over  30   years  of   age,   26 by   the   provincial  councils.)  Voting   has   been  made  compulsory, under  penalty  of   a   fine   and   disfranchisement  for   the   fourth  abstention. The   government  had   proposed  proportional  representation, the   Catholics  rejected  it.

The  new  system  created  1,350,000  voters,  with  2,066,000  votes. At   the   first   election,  in   1894,   the   old   Liberal  party   disappeared almost  entirely,  except  a   few   Progressists.  The   Catholics  had enormous  majority.  The  Walloon  provinces  elected  principal!

The   Catholic  party   used  its   large   majority  to   carry   in $95   a   law   on  municipal  elections,  favourable  to   the   peasants, id   a   school  law   intrusting  religious  instruction  in   the   schools o   priests.      It   also   gave   a   share  of   the   public-school  moneys  to ie   Catholic  parish   schools.

The  balance  of   parties   in   Belgium  has   been  destroyed  by   uniersal   suffrage.     The   Doctrinaire   party   no   longer    exists;   its oters,   for   fear   of   socialism,  have   joined   the   Catholic  party.      The hole  field  is   now  occupied  by   the   two  extreme  parties:  the Catholic  party,  supported  by   the   Flemish  peasantry,  and   the   Socialist party,   strong   among   the   industrial  classes  of   the   Walloon provinces.     Between  the   two,  the   Progressists,  who   have  grown more  and   more  like   the   French  Radicals,  are  obliged,  in   order  to oppose  the   Catholic  government,  to   join   the   Socialists.     It   is   the struggle  of   anti-clerical   Republicans  against  the   partisans   of Church  and  Monarchy.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.

THE  NETHERLANDS  AND  LUXEMBURG.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.- See  Langlois,  "Manuel  de   Bibl.  Hist.,"  paragr.  66 and  133.

WORKS.- The  chief  modern  histories  of   the  Kingdom  of   the  Netherlands are   :   Nuyens,  "   Geschiedenis  van   het   Nederlandschen  Volk  van  1815," 14   vols.,   1883-86. - F.   de   Bosch-Kemper,  "   Geschied.  van   Nederland  na  1830,"   5 vols.,   1873-82  ;   both  conservative.

ON   THE  FOUNDATION  OF  THE  KINGDOM:  Th.  Juste,  "   Le   SoulevetLient  de la   Hollande  et   la   Fondation  des   Pays-Bas,"  1870.

ON   POLITICAL  INSTITUTIONS  :   DeHartog,  "   Das  Staatsrecht  d.   K.   Niederande,"  1886  (Marquardsen  coll.)   a   juridical  account,  with  bibl.

ON   RELIGIOUS  PARTIES  :   Chantepie  de   la   Saussaye,  "   La   Crise  Religieuse  en Hollande,"  1860.- Fr.   Nippold,  "   Romisch  Kathol.  Kirche  im   K.   d.   Niederande,"  1877.

FOR  LUXEMBURG  :   Eyschen,  "   Das  Staatsrecht  d.   Gr.  H.   Luxemburg," 8go(Marqu.  coll.),  gives   a   bibl.,   a   history,  and  a   description  of   instituions.

## BELGIUM.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.- See  Langlois,    "Man.    de    Bibl.    Hist."- Pirenne, ' Bibl.   de   1'Hist.  de   Belgique,"  1893,   stops   at   1830. - Lorenz,  "   Catal.  de   la -(ibrairie  Frangaise,"  gives   a   number  of   Belgian  works.

SOURCES.- The  sources  may   be   classified  as   follows  :

PARLIAMENTARY  DOCUMENTS  :   Huyttens,  "   Discuss,  du   Congres  Nation,  de Belgique,"   5   vols.,  1845.     Then,  since  the   origin   of   the   Chambers,  the ' Annales    Parlementaires  de    Belg. "     Among  the  accompanying  documents, "   Enquete  Scolaire,"  5   vols.,   1881-84.

RECOLLECTIONS  AND  PRIVATE  PAPERS.- Among  the  recollections  published by   politicians  or  on  their  papers  :   L.   de   Potter,  "   Souvenirs,"  2   vols., 1839,  repub.- P.   de   Decker,  "15   years,  1830-45,"  1845,  liberal.-  Discailles, "   Ch.   Rogier,"  4   vols.,   1895,   liberal.-  Nothomb,  "   Essai  sur   la   Revol.  Beige," 2   vols.,   4th   edit.,   1876,   Cath.  liberal. - Vande  Weyer,  "   Memoires,"  2   vols., 1871.

PAPERS  AND  REVIEWS. - The  most  important  reviews  publications  are  : L?   Indtpendance  Beige,  liber.  ; Le  Bien  Public,  Cath.  Liberal  reviews  : Revue  de   Belgique  ;   Flandre  Libdrale.

WORKS. - LARGE  GENERAL  HISTORIES  :   For  the  period  1814-30  :   De Gerlache,  "   Hist,  du   Roy.   des   Pays-Bas,"  3d   edit,   3   vols.,   1859,   Cathol.,  a hist,  of   the   whole  kingdom  up   to   the   separation. - Hymans,  "   Hist.  Parlement.  de   la   Belg.   from  1814   to   1830,"   1869. - For   Belgium  since  1835   :   j..j. Thonissen,  "   La   Belg.   sous  le   Regne   de   Leopold  I.,"   4   vols.,   1855-58,  conservative.-Hymans,  "   Hist.   Parl.   de   Belg.   de   1830   a   1880,"   1877-80.  This history  of   Belg.   has   the   most  complete  supply   of   documents,  consisting  of an  analysis  of   all   the   debates  in   the   Chambers.

ON   THE  REVOLUTION  PERIOD  :   The  works  of   Th.   Juste,   "   La   Revol.  Beige," 1870. - "   Fondateurs  de   la   Monarchic  Beige,"  22  vols.,  1866-78,  biographies of   the   politicians  of   1830. - "   Congres  National  de   Belgique,"  2   vols.,   1880. "   Les   Frontieres  de   la   Belgique,"  1866.

ON   RELIGIOUS  STRUGGLES  :   De   Laveleye,  "   Le,   Parti  Clerical  en   Belgique," 1874.  "   La   Belgique  et   le   Vatican."  3   vols.,  1880-81,  attributed  to   FrereOrban;  both  liberal. - Woeste,  "   Vingt   Ans  de   Polemique,"  3   vols.,  1885, Cath.

ON  POLITICAL  INSTITUTIONS:  Thonissen,  "Constitution  Beige,"  3d.   edit., 1879. - A.   Giron,   "   Droit  Public  de   la   Belgique,"  1884.   "   Droit  Adninis.  dela Belg.,"  2  vols.,  1881.- Vauthier,  "   Staatsrecht  d.   K.   Belgien,"  1892   (Marquardsen). - Hymans,  "   La   Belg.   Contemp.,"  1880,  a   good   historical  outline of   political  evolution.- Dupriez,  "Les  Ministres  dans  les   pays,"  2  vols. 2d   ed.,   1893;   vol.   i   has   an  excellent  account  of   the   Belgian  Government. The  author  is   himself  a   Belgian.

ON  SOCIAL  DEVELOPMENT  :   "   50   Ans  de   Liberte,"  4vols.,  1881.  Collection of   a   number  of   authors  on  the  progress  of   Belgium  from  1830   to   1880  : Polit.  Life  (Goblet  d'Alviella),  Sciences,  Arts,  Letters,  Education,  Political   Economy.

## CHAPTER  IX.

SWITZERLAND.

It   would  be   a   mistake  to   measure  the   interest  of   Switzerland's history  by   the   size   of   her   territory.  This  little  country  fills   a large   place   in   the   history   of   the   existing   institutions  of   Europe. Every   canton  has   been   the   scene  of   political  experiences,  and   as each   combined,  in   a   way  peculiar  to   itself,   varying   conditions  of language,  religion,  territorial  extent,  and  economic  life,   these experiences  have  been  extremely  varied.  It   is   not  possible  to describe  here   the   agitations,  revolutions,  wars,   discussions,  and constitutional  changes  of   all   the   cantons;  but   to   one  who   would comprehend  the   development  of   modern  democratic  states,  this history   is   to   be   commended  as  embodying  the   most  instructive practical  examples  of   the   principle  of   popular  sovereignty.

The   Switzerland  of   1814. - Contemporary  Switzerland,  like   Belgium and   Holland,  is   a  product  of   the   French  Revolution. France  destroyed  the   old   aristocratic  regime   in   Switzerland  and prepared  the   way   for   the   new   democratic  system.

In   the   eighteenth  century  Switzerland  was  only   a  perpetual j league   of   little   sovereign  states,   held   together   by   solemn  engageiments  not  to   make  war  on  each  other,  and  to   help   each  other against  outside  enemies.  The  union  was  not  even  a  single league,   but   a   series  of   leagues   within  leagues,  made  at   different times  and  under  different  conditions.  The  old   members  of   the [confederation  (13   cantons)  were  still  distinguished  from  the imple   allies,   to   say   nothing   of   the   districts  ruled  by   certain  canons which   had   formerly   conquered  them.*

The   cantons  recognised  no  superior  authority  in   the   federation;

*   The  original  league  was  between  the  three  forest  cantons,  Uri, schwytz,  and  Unterwalden  ;   to   these  were  added,  in   the   fourteenth  cenury,   three  cities,  Lucerne,  Zurich,  Berne,  and   two  small  districts,  Zug   and &gt;larus.  At   the   end  of   the   fifteenth  and   the   beginning  of   the   sixteenth  cenury   Soleure,  Bale,   Freiburg,  Schaffhausen,  and   Appenzell  joined  the   federtion.  These  were  the  13   confederate  cantons.  The  allies  were  Geneva, lienne,   Neuchatel,  Saint-Gall,  the   league  of   the   Grisons  and  that  of   the ralais.  The  subject  districts  were  Vaud,  Aargau,  Thurgau,  and  the   Italian istrict  of   Ticino.

17

the   Diet   was  only   a   meeting  of   their  ambassadors.  They   governed themselves  without  any  common  system,  each  following its   own  customs  based  on   historical  rights.  In   each  canton,  absolute power   belonged   to   the   people   of   one  city   or  one  region, commonly  even  to  certain  old  families,  who  governed  all   the other  inhabitants  with  despotic  power.  Each  government,  having power   to   regulate   ecclesiastical  affairs,   imposed  its   accepted religion  on  all   its   subjects.  This  made  the   cantons  religious  as well   as   political   divisions  of   the   population.  The   league   between the   cantons  established  no  relations  between  their  inhabitants: citizens  of   one  canton  were  treated  as  aliens  in   every  other,   and special   treaties  were  required  to   enable  the   citizens  of   any   canton to   acquire   a   domicile  or   hold   property  in   other  cantons.  Under this   traditional  constitution,  based  on  aristocracy  and  religious differences,  without  national  unity,  religious  liberty,  or  civil equality,  the   Swiss  people   had   neither  political  life   nor  the   means of   reforming  their  condition.  "   The   Swiss,"  said  Goethe,  "   having delivered  themselves  from  one  tyrant,  have  fancied  themselves free;   but   from   the   carcass  of   the   oppressor  the   sun   has caused  a   swarm  of   petty   tyrants  to   spring   up."

The  French  invasion  of   1798   made  an  end   of   the   old   condition of   affairs.  The   Helvetic  Republic,  modelled  on  the   French  Republic, established  a   central  government  and   civil   equality   of   all citizens.  This  was  the   first   experience  of   a   Swiss  nation.  It   was also   the   origin   of   civil   wars  which  lasted  five   years.*  The   revolutionary principle   of   unity   and   equality  found  few   defenders  outside the   Vaudois,  a   people   of   French  blood  previously  subject   to Berne.  The  Bernese  and  the   people   of   the   mountain  cantons  resisted the   new  order   of   things   with   passionate  energy.

Napoleon  ended  the   war  by   imposing  a  compromise  on  the1 contending  parties.  The  Act  of   Mediation  of   1803   restored  the sovereignty  of   the   cantons  by   restricting  the   Diet  to   foreign   and military  affairs,  and   making  the   deputies  subject   to   the   instructions of   their  cantons.  But  he   maintained  equality  by   giving   the title   of   Canton  to   the   districts  formerly  recognised  only   as  allied, and   even  to   the   subject   districts  ; f   also   by   requiring  each  cantor to   adopt   a   constitution  in   conformity  with  French  principles -

*   These  contests,  and  the  very   interesting  experiments  in   constitution making  in   this  period,  are  very  clearly  described  in   Hilty's  "   Oeffentlichi Vorlesungen  iiber  die   Helvetische  Republik."
- f The  six   new  cantons  were  Aargau,  Thurgau,  Vaud,  Ticino,  Saint-Gall and  the  Grisons.

civil   equality,  religious  liberty,  freedom  of   commerce  and  of comicile.  The  ancient  little  cantons  of   the   High   Alps   retained their  old   assembly  of   the   citizens  (Lands  gemeinde),  meeting  in the   open  air   once  a   year   to   make  their  laws.  The   larger   cantons adopted   modern  constitutions,  with  representative  assemblies elected   by   the   property  owners.  This  new  Switzerland  had little   political   life,   as   it   was   dependent  on   Napoleon,  whose  chief concern  with  it   was  to   get   soldiers.  (Ten   thousand  Swiss  perished in   the   Russian  campaign.)  But  at   least  the   .Swiss   began under  him  an  apprenticeship  in   individual  liberty   and   equality, and   in   national  spirit.

Period  of   the   Restoration  (1814-30). - When  the   allied  armies entered  Switzerland  the   partisans  of   the   old   regime   rose  to   reestablish the   old   cantonal  governments  and  the   old   league. They   succeeded  in   gaining  control,  first   in   the   aristocratic  cantons of   Berne  and  Soleure,  then  in   the   Catholic  cantons,  Freiburg, Lucerne,   the   three   forest   cantons,  and   Zug.   At   Berne  the government  that   was   in   office  in   1798   was  restored,  and   declared ; the   Act   of   Mediation  null.  The   federal  Diet   was  sitting   in   1814 at   Zurich  (it   alternated  yearly   between  the   six   principal  cities). The   eight   cantons  favouring  the   reaction  withdrew  their  representatives and   formed   a   separate   Diet   at   Lucerne.  There  they demanded  a  return  to  the   old   constitution.  Berne  and  Uri   demanded back   their   former  subjects.  Schwytz  and   Unterwalden aspired   to   go   back   to   the   beginning  of   Swiss  history :   the   ancient agreements  should  first   be   renewed  between  the   three  forest  cantons, then   that   with   Lucerne,  then   those  with   the   other  cantons, n   the   order   in   which  they   had   been   made  originally.

The   new  constitution  was  supported  by   the   other  cantons,  especially by   the   new  ones,  whose  very  existence  was  threatened. Switzerland  found  herself  divided  into  two   hostile  leagues,  each epresented  by   a   Diet.  Civil   war  was  on   the   eve  of   breaking  out. It   was  the   sovereigns  of   Europe   who  stopped  it   and   saved  the work  of   Napoleon.  The  Tsar  had   had   two   Vaudois  friends,  Lalarpe  and   Jomini;  he   declared  himself  against  the   restoration. The   old   regime   governments,  too  weak  to   accomplish  their  obects   without  help,   abandoned  their  claims  on  their  former  subfects,   offering   to   accept  a   money   indemnity.  The  allies  gave lerne,   by   way  of   compensation,  the   district  of   Bienne  and   the Id   bishopric  of   Bale,   a   Catholic  country  that   had   formed  the 'rench  department  of   Mont-Terrible,  and  later  became  the   Berese   Jura.

The  eight   seceding  cantons  returned  to   the   Diet.  Three  new cantons,  taken  from  the   French  Empire,  were  added - Geneva, Neuchatel,  and  Valais.  This  Diet  of   22  cantons  laboured  seventeen months  in   making  a  constitution - the   Federal  Pact  of August  7,   1815,   made  after  bitter  contests  regarding  the   old   subject districts.  The   Great  Powers  ratified  it,   and   guaranteed  the neutrality  of   Switzerland - which  might  furnish  occasion  for interfering  in   its   internal  affairs. teen

The  system  established  in   1815   differed  little  from  the   Act   of Mediation.  The  cantons  were  sovereign,  retaining  all  the powers  not  expressly  given   to   the   confederation.  They   had   the postal   service,  the   coinage,  civil   rights,   and   the   power  of   making commercial  treaties  with  foreign  nations.  The  confederation had  only   diplomatic  and  military  affairs  and  the   settlement  of difficulties  between  cantons.  The  Diet  was  not  an  assembly  of representatives  of   the   people,  but   a  meeting  of   delegates  from the   cantonal  governments.*  It   sat  alternately  in   the   three  leading cantons,   Berne,   Zurich,   and   Lucerne.  The   canton  in   which its   sessions  were  held  in   any   given   year  was  called  the   Vorort; its   executive  council  acted  as  a   federal  executive  for   the   time. Switzerland  was  not  yet   a   federal  state;   it   was  a   federation  of states.  Its   constitution  was  only   a   "   federal  pact  "   between sovereign  states.  The  inhabitants  of   one  canton  were  not  even given   the   right   of   residence  in   other  cantons;  for   this,   special agreements  between  the   governments  of   the   cantons  were  necessary. On   this   point   the   "   Pact  of   1815   "   returned  to   the   old1 system.

Each  canton  settled  at   will   its   own   internal  constitution,  each had  its   own  special   institutions.  Neglecting  minor  differences we  may  classify   the   cantonal  constitutions  into   five   groups:

First.  The  little  mountain  cantons,  Uri,   Schwytz,  Unterwal den,   the   two   halves  of   Appenzell,  Zug,   and   Glarus,  retained  th&lt; old   government  by   the   Lands gem-iende,  or  yearly   open-air  assem bly   of   the   men  of   the   canton.  This   decided  public   questions  am chose  the   executive  officers.

Second.  The  ancient  leagues - Grisons  and  Valais - remaine( subordinate  confederations.  The  Grisons  had  a  central  Grant Council  of   65   delegates - 27   from  the   Ligue   Grise  (Graubund),  2

*The  delegates  were  bound  by   their  instructions,  and  their  consent  t measures  was  only   provisional,  ad   referendum,  ad   instruendum,  or   a rattficandum.  Their  sessions  were  secret.

from  the   Ligue   Cadee  (Gotteshausbund),  and  13   from  the   League of   the   Ten   Jurisdictions.  These  delegates  had  to   follow  the instructions  of   the   districts  they   represented,  each  of   which had   an  almost  sovereign  assembly.  Valais  was  divided  into  13 Dizains,  each  of   which  had   a   council  elected  by   the   communes; the   power  of   the   League   was  exercised  by   a   Diet  composed  of four  delegates  from  each  dizain,  and  four  votes  for   the   Bishop of   Sion.

Third.  The  old   aristocratic  cantons,  Berne,  Lucerne,  Zurich, Freiburg,  Soleure,  Bale,   Schaffhausen,  and  Geneva,  had  commonly a   Grand  Council  empowered  to  exercise  the  sovereign power  and   a   Lesser  Council  for   executive  business - both  usually composed  of   members  of   the   old   families.

Fourth.  The  new  cantons,  St.   Gall,   Aargau,  Thurgau,  Vaud, and   Ticino  had   elected  Councils,  elected,  however,  by   the   property owners.

Fifth.  Neuchatel  kept   its   Prince,  the   King   of   Prussia,  who   by the   Constitutional  Charter  established  two  councils,  the   Executive Council  of   State   and   the   Audience  General - the   latter  made  up   in part   of   nominees  of   the   Prince  and   in   part   of   elected  members.

Save  in   the   mountain  cantons,  all   the   governments  established political  inequality  between  the   inhabitants.  The  people   of   the chief-place,  who  made  the   constitutions,  had   followed  a   very  old I   custom  by   so  regulating  the   election  of   the   councils  as   to   give themselves  always  a   majority  against   the   rest  of   the   canton,  even where  the   rest  of   the   canton  far   outnumbered  them  in   population. Further,  a   majority  of   the   members  from  the   chief-place  were, in   the   case  of   the   aristocratic  cantoris,  chosen  by   the   old families.  .   .

In   the   new  cantons,  where  the   chief-place  had   not  the   habit  of ruling,   the  constitutions  established  elective  councils,  giving roughly  half   of   the   members  to   the   rest  of   the   canton.  But   the difference  of   wealth  gave   inequality  of   power,  according  to   a   principle accepted   at   that   time   throughout  Europe.  The   right   of electing   was  reserved  to   the   heavier  taxpayers.  Besides,  there was  systematic  effort  to   limit  the   action  of   the   voters  by   several devices.  The  representatives  were  chosen  for   very   long   periods, so  as   to   make  the   elections  as   infrequent  as  possible.  Indirect election  was  established.  The  election  procedure  was   intentionally complicated.  The   Grand  Council  of   Vaud  was  composed  of 180   members  elected  for   12  years,  and   renewable  by   thirds;  63 chosen  by   the   Grand  Council  itself  from  a   list   of   candidates  pre-

pared   by   the   districts,  36   by   a   body   of   electors,  63   chosen  directly by   the   voters,  18   elected  by   the   district  assemblies.  The   maxim of   the   Liberals  of   that   day   was  :   everything  for   the   people,   nothing by   the   people.

Every  canton  was  supreme  in   questions  of   Church  and   school. Several  forbade  any   form  of   worship  other  than  that  established by   the   state.  Valais  did   not  allow  Protestant  worship;  Vaud  did not  allow  Catholic  worship.  Even  in   the   cantons  that  had  religious toleration  it   was   the   clergy   who   controlled  marriage  and registered  births  and   deaths.

Under  these  aristocratic  and  sectarian  constitutions  public activity  was  weak  until  about  1829.  Some  institutions - the Federal  Military  School  of   Thoune  (1818),  the   Swiss  Society  of Natural  Sciences,  the   Students'  Association,  and  the  Federal Shooting-matches - mark  nevertheless  the   beginning  of   a   better feeling   between  citizens  of   the   different  cantons.  But   the   chief political  business  was  the  supervision  of   foreign  refugees. Switzerland  was  an  asylum  for  the  proscribed.  Newspapers hostile  to  the  European  governments  were  published  there. The  Greajt  Powers  made  complaints,  and  the  government  of Berne  induced  the   Diet  to   vote  the   "   Conclusum  "   of   1823,   which required  the   cantons  to   "   prohibit  in   newspapers  and   periodicals everything  that  could  offend  the   powers  in   friendly  relations  with Switzerland  "   and  to  prevent  "   persons  escaped  from  another state,  after  having  committed  there  offences  against  the   public peace,   from  entering  into,   or  sojourning  upon,  the   territory  of the   confederation."  Every   foreigner  was  to   furnish  a  certificate from  the   authorities  of   his   own  country.  Several  cantons  even established  a   censorship  of   the   press.   This  "   conclusum,"  voted for   a   year,  was  renewed  annually  until  1829.   This  measure  of Absolutist  police   was  the   only   important  federal  act.

The  Regeneration  (1829-37). - In   1829   a  series  of   agitations, revolutions,  and   civil   wars  began   which  lasted  until  the   general war  of   1847.   The   Swiss  have  called  it   the   period   of   regeneration.

The  Swiss,  who,   until  that  time,   had  received  their  political impulses  from  abroad,  took  themselves  the   initiative  in   constitutional reform.  As   early   as  1829   a   democratic  party   appeared which  laboured  to  amend  the  constitutions  of   the   cantons  and then  the  constitution  of   the   confederation.  It   was  made  up chiefly   from  the   classes  left   out  of   account  by   the   government and  took  presently  the   name  of   Radical  party.   The   movement;

begun   in   1829,   was  stimulated  by   the   French  Revolution  of   1830. In   nearly   all   the   cantons  the   inhabitants  gathered  and   drew  up petitions  asking   for   revision  of   the   constitutions.  Neither  revolutions nor   outbreaks  were  necessary;  the   governments  were alarmed  and  granted  revision.

The  centre  of   the   agitation  was  Zurich.  A   fugitive  German professor,  Snell,   founded  there  a   journal  called  the   Swiss  Republican and   drew   up   the   "   memorial  of   Kussnach,"  which  embodied the   program  of   the   party :   sovereignty  of   the   people,   universal suffrage,   and   direct   election. versal

One  by   one  eleven  cantons,  the   most  populous,  amended  their constitutions  peaceably.  The  Radical  program  demanded  sovereignty of   the   people,   universal  suffrage,  equality  of   rights,   separation of   the   powers,  publicity  of   the   debates,  liberty   of   the   press, right   of   petition,   freedom  of   opinion,   of   residence,  and   of   industry. The   revised  constitutions  admitted  nearly   all   these  principles.  .   . Exceptions  worth  noting  were  that  Lucerne,  Zurich,  and  Schaffhausen  preserved  the   over-representation  of   the   capital   city,   that Berne  retained  the   property  qualification  for   voting,  and  Freiburg retained  indirect  election.

The  federal  Diet  had  decided,  December,  1830,   not  to   intervene in   any  way   in   the   constitutional  changes  of   the   cantons.  It was  forced,  however,  to   intervene  to   restore  order  in   the   cantons where   serious  dissensions  arose.  In   Schwytz,  the   external districts,  having   failed  to   gain   equality,  had   seceded,  and   drawn up   a   constitution  as  a   new  canton;  they   even  attempted  to   surprise the   government  garrison.  The  Diet  condemned  their action  as  a   breach  of   the   peace  and   sent   fedefal  troops  to   put them  down.  At   Bale,   the   government,  composed  of   city   people, having   drawn  up   a   constitution  which  accorded  larger   representation to   the   city   than   to   the   rural   districts,  the   rural   communes bad   voted  against   it  :   the   government  took   revenge   by   withdrawng   their   right   of   self-government.  The   communes  answered  by declaring  themselves  independent  of   the   city,   and   drawing  up   a constitution  as  a   separate  canton.  The  city   resorted  to   military force   to   put   down  the   movement;  but   the   Diet  supported  the rural  communes,  and  Bale  was  divided  into  two  sovereign  halfcantons,  Bale-city  and   Bale-country  (1833).

The  regenerated  cantons  wished  the  confederation  to   be   regenerated also,   in   order   to   strengthen  the   federal  government and   proclaim  the   sovereignty  of   the   people.  The   German  cantons, taking   the   lead,   formed,  in   March,  1832,   the   "   Siebener-

concordat,"  a   league   of   seven  cantons  for   mutual  defence  against attempts  at   reaction.  They   pledged  themselves  to  maintain  the rights   and   liberties  of   the   people,   to   sustain  the   lawful  authorities and   defend  their  new  constitutions  by   force  of   arms.  This  league was  to   labour  for   a   revision  of   the   federal  constitution,  in   order  to have  the   cantonal  constitutions  protected  by   the   federal  government; the   Concordat  was  to   lapse   when  the   confederation  should have  assumed  this   responsibility.

The  cantons  attached  to   the   old   system  answered  by   a   counter league,  the   Sarnerbund,  formed  November,  1832,   between  Neuchatel,  Bale,   Valais,  and   the   three  forest  cantons.  These  agreed not  to   send  their  representatives  to   the   Diet,   in   order  to   hinder revision.  The  Diet,   where  the   regenerated  cantons  had  a  majority, dissolved  the   league   and   compelled  the   members  of   it   to send  their  deputies  as  usual.  Then  it   voted  in   favour  of   amending the   constitution.  A   draft  of   the   amendments  was  submitted to   the   cantons,  but   failed  of   adoption  because  the   people   in   two of   the   regenerated  cantons  rejected  them.  No  new  draft  was agreed  on,  and  so   the   project   of   revision  was  abandoned.  The main  result  of   the   movement  was  to   lead  the   Diet  to   nuake  its sessions  public.

After  the   failure  of   revision  the   political   life   of   the   cantons  was filled  with  confused  movements.  Three  of   these  may   be   noted:

First.  A   new  division  of   political  parties  came  about.  Till then  the   division  was   into   Liberals  and   Conservatives;  after  the attempted  revision  the   Liberals  divided.  The  more  eager  wished to  continue  the  revolution  and  establish  political  equality throughout  Switzerland:  these  formed  the   Radical  party,  resting on  the   general  mass  of   the   voters.  On   the   other  hand,   the   men who,   during  the   revision  movement,  had  conducted  the   governments, regarded   the   revolution  as  ended  and   became  the   party of   the   just   mean,  opposing  further  changes:  this   was  the   party   of the   middle  class,   the   statesmen,  the   jurists,  and  the   educated classes  in   general.*  But  it   failed  to   develop  strength;  it   held aloof  from  political  agitation  and   gradually  lost   its   influence  with the   masses.  The  Radical  party  was  managed  by   a  general  asso-

- *Rohmers  has  expressed  the  views  of   this  party   in   a   theory,  or  rather a   metaphor,  which  a  well-known  writer,  Bluntschli,  adopts  in   his   work  on the   state  :   "   There  are   four   parties,   corresponding  to   the   four  ages   of   man: two  extremes - the  radical,  who  is   the  ignorant  child,   the  absolutist,  who is   the   decrepit  old   man;  two   intermediate  parties  of   political  wisdom - the liber   al&gt;   who   is   the   young  man,  and  the   conservative,  the   mature  man."

ciation,  the   National  Vercin;  it   went  on  agitating  for   revision  and gathered  to   itself  young  men  of   the   new  generation.

Second.  The  reactions  that  followed,  throughout  the  Continent, the   movements  of   1830,   filled   Switzerland  with  political refugees  accused  in   their  own  countries  of   conspiracy.  .   .   Demands for   their   expulsion  led   to   contests  in   Switzerland,  the Radicals  supporting  the   refugees  in   the   name  of   Swiss  independence and   democratic  principles;  the   Liberals  supported  the   demands of   the   foreign  governments  and,   joining  the   Conservatives, carried   through   the   Diet   a   provision  for   a   central  police   to exercise  surveillance  over  the   refugees.

Third.  A   transformation  came  about  in   the   Catholic  cantons. A   Catholic  party  was   formed  which  put   the   religious  question before  political  questions.  It   found  its   support  not  among  the aristocratic  Conservatives,  but   among  the   peasants,  and  avowed itself   a   democratic  party.  It   sought,  by   the   help   of   the   rural voters,  to   deprive   the   Liberals  of   control.

Local  Conflicts  (1837-45). - Troubles  broke  out  regarding ecclesiastical  affairs.  German  Switzerland  belonged,  until  1815,   to the   diocese  of   Constance.  The   Swiss  governments,  unwilling  to be   subject   to   a   foreign   bishop,   obtained,  after   long   negotiations, the   creation  of   six   Swiss  bishoprics  directly  subject   to   the   Pope. Certain  Liberal  governments  agreed  in   the   Articles  of   Baden  to place   the   relations  between  Church  and  state  under  sovereign control  of   the   lay   power.  The   Pope   condemned  the   Articles  as contrary  to  the   constitution  of   the   Church.  There  were  outbreaks of   the   Catholic  inhabitants  against  the   commands  of   the

Protestant  governments  in   Aargau,  Saint-Gall,  and   Bernese  Jura.

In   several  cantons  there  were  armed  conflicts  on  various  questions. There   was  a   fight   in   Schwytz   regarding  the   use  of   common pastures  (Allmende).  The  owners  of   large   cattle,  nicknamed Horns,   came  to   the   Assembly  of   the   canton  armed  with clubs;   their  opponents,  the   owners  of   small  cattle,  nicknamed Split-hoofs  (Klauen)  were  unarmed.  There  was  a  vote,  and   the vote  was  doubted.  The  Horns  dispersed  the   Split-hoofs  with their   clubs.  There  was  a   battle  with  guns   in   Ticino,  and   the Radicals  won  the   day.   In   Valais  the   Radicals  had   long   demanded equality   of   representation  for   Lower  Valais;   in   1838   they got   proceedings  started  for   a   revision  of   the   constitution.  The Diet   supported  them  and   ordered  the   election  of   a   convention  to frame  a  constitution.  Upper  Valais,  to  save  its   privileges, wished  to   be   made  a   separate  canton,  but   this   the   Diet   refused.

The  new  constitution  was  submitted  to  popular  vote:  Lower Valais  gave  a   majority  of   8000  in   its   favour;  Upper   Valais,  according to   its   own  claim,   gave  a   majority  of   10,770  votes  against it.   This  was  evidently  a   fraudulent  claim.  The  Radicals  of Lower  Valais  made  an  armed  invasion  of   Upper  Valais  and forced  it   to   accept  the   constitution  (1840).

Of   all   the   petty   wars  of   the   period   the   most  characteristic  is the   "   affray   of   Zurich."  The  Radical  governments  had  called to  the   University  of   Zurich  a   German  professor,  the  famous rationalist  Strauss,  author  of   the   "   Life   of   Jesus."  The   pastors, aroused,  organized  a   Committee  of   the   Faith,  which  demanded the  recall  of  the  appointment.  The  government  retired Strauss,  but  declared  that  it   could  not  allow  the  committee to   hold  cpmmunal  assemblies.  The  committee  protested  and held  a  meeting  of  15,000  persons.  Early  in  the  morning of   September  6,   1839,   f°ur  or   f*ve  thousand  men,  brought together  by   the   pastors  of   Pfaffikon,  on  the   border  of   the   lake, marched  on  Zurich.  At  their  Head  were  five  hundred  men armed  with  guns;  the   rest  carried  scythes  and  flails.  During that  year   Zurich,  as   Vorort,  was  the   seat  of   the   Diet,   and  its council  was  therefore  acting   as   the   federal  executive.  To   defend this   government  there  were  in   the   city   only   190   foot   soldiers and  30   horsemen.  One  volley  was  enough  to  stop  the   insur-j gents;   but   forthwith  the   troops  were  withdrawn  to   their  barracks. The  citizens  responsible  for  the  care  of   the  arsenals  handed them  over  to   the   insurgents  and   the   members  of   the   council  resigned their   offices.  The   insurgents,  masters  of   Zurich,  established a   provisional  council,  which  found  itself  invested  with  the; federal  executive  power.  Thus  a  petty  cantonal  insurrection sufficed  to   change   the   directory  of   the   confederation.

Amid  these  conflicts  the  intermediate  parties,  Conservatives and  Liberals,  lost   gradually  their  control  of   the   cantons;  power was  passing  to   the   two  extreme  parties.  In   the   Protestant  cantons the   Radicals  were  taking   the   place   of   the   old   families.*  Ir the   Catholic  cantons,  the   Democratic  Catholic  party   was   displac ing   the   champions  of   lay   sovereignty.  The  Jesuits   directs

*   At   Geneva,  Fazy,   the   Radical  leader,  had  to   make  a   coalition  with   th Catholics  of   the   rural  communes,  in   order  to   oust  the   patricians  from   th government.  A   rising  was  required  in   1841   to  obtain  the  constitution; convention  that  prepared  the  democratic  constitution  of   1842   ;   a   revr lution  was  needed  in   1846   to   drive  the   patrician  leaders  from  the   counci and  obtain  the   Constitution  of   1847.

ie   movement,  and  took  advantage  of   it   to   found  colleges  in chwytz,  Freiburg,  and  Lucerne.  The  party  got   control  in rreiburg  in   1837   and  in   Lucerne  in   1841.  By   17,555  votes gainst   1679   the   people   of   Lucerne  voted  the   Democratic  Cathlic   constitution,  giving   the   city   and   rural  districts  equal   repreentation,  abrogating  the   Articles  of   Baden,  and   suppressing  lay upervision  of   schools.  The  new  government  submitted  this onstitution  to  the   Pope   for   his   approval.  In   Valais,  after  a &gt;loody  struggle,  the   victorious  Catholics  made  a  constitution j which  forbade  all   other  forms  of   worship  than  the  Catholic (1844).

The  political  forces  gradually  grouped  themselves  into  two parties,   the   Catholics  and   their   opponents,  without  reference  to cantonal  lines.     The  Protestant  government  of   Aargau,  after  a Catholic  outbreak  in   opposition,  suppressed  the   eight   convents in   the   canton;  the   Catholics  got   a   decision  from  the   Diet  annulling the   action  as  contrary  to   the   federal  constitution.    Aargau ,   accepted,  in   1843,   a   compromise  re-establishing  the   convents  for I women;  but  in   1844   it   demanded  of   the   Diet  the   expulsion  of the   Jesuits.      Battalions  of   volunteers  were  formed  in   Lucerne, | and   armed  from  the   federal  arsenals,  to   oppose  the   Catholic  government; they   were  commanded  by   Ochsenbein,  later  chief  of the   staff   in   the   federal  army.     Twice  they   marched  upon   the   city, but   were  beaten  (1844-45).     The  government  of   Lucerne  condemned such   of   them  as  were  captured  to   punishment  as  ordinary criminals.

The   Sonderbund  and   the   Civil   War  (184547).- The   Swiss  were divided  into   two  extreme  parties,  ready   for   war  with   each   other. The   Catholic  party   gave  official  form  to   the   division  by   forming a   Separate   Union  (Sonderbund)  between  the   seven  Catholic  cantons, Uri,   Schwytz,   Unterwalden,  Zug,   Lucerne,  Freiburg,  and IValais  (1845).  These  cantons  agreed,  "in   case  one  or  more  of heir   number  should  be   attacked,  to   repel   the   attack  in   common  "; hey   represented  their  action  as   taken  "   in   defence  of   their  sovreignty   and   territorial  rights   ";   their   league   as  a   defensive  one, modelled  on  the   ancient  alliances.  They   instituted  a   council  of war  of   seven  delegates  which  should  take  the   necessary  measires  to   defend  the   cantons.  Each  canton  contributed  to  the defence  fund  in   the   proportion  of   its   federal  burdens.

The  Radical  party  called  on  the   Diet  to   expel   the   Jesuits   and dissolve  the   Sonderbund.  This  meant  war.  Several  cantons lesitated;  in   order  to   obtain  a   majority  in   the   Diet,   the   Radicals

laboured  to   overturn  the   cantonal  governments  that  wished  to remain  neutral.  They   made  the   expulsion  of   the   Jesuits   the   primary question   of   Swiss   politics.  Taking   advantage  of   the   unpopularity of   the   Jesuits   to   compromise  the  governments  suspected of   favouring  them,  they   succeeded  in   getting  into  power in   Vaud,  Berne,  Geneva,  and  Saint-Gall.  The  control  of   the votes  of   these  cantons  gave   them  a  majority  in   the   federal  Diet. They   carried  through  the   Diet  an  order  dissolving  the   Sonderbund, and   a   vote   asking   the   cantons  to   expel   the   Jesuits.   The cantons  of   the   Sonderbund  decided  to   resist,   and   recalled  their deputies  from  the   Diet.

The  Diet  gave  the  direction  of   the   war  to   General  Dufour, a   Conservative.  In   November,  1847,   he   had  100,000  men  and 172   cannons.  The  Sonderbund  had  only   30,000  men  and  74   cannons. But   they   counted  on   the   weakness  of   the   Diet,   the   ease of   defence  in   their  mountains,  and   the   likelihood  of   intervention from  without.  The  four  great  powers  (Austria,  Prussia,  Russia, and  France)  promised  .to   intervene  for   the   maintenance  of   the Pact  of   1815   and   the   sovereignty  of   the   cantons  placed   under their  guarantee.  The  council  of   war  of   the   Sonderbund  received 400,000   florins  from  Austria  and   3000  guns  and  some cannon  from  Louis  Philippe.  The  Diet,  having- received  from the   English   government  a   secret  intimation  that   the   great   powers were  going   to   intervene,  ordered  that  op-erations  should  be   rapidly pushed.  Dufour,  concentrating  all   his   forces,  marched  on Freiburg,  which  yielded  without  fighting  (November  14),   then on   Zug,   then  on   Lucerne.  The  army  of   the   Sonderbund  dispersed, and   Lucerne  was  taken  November  24.   The   forest  cantons had   no   choice  but   to   capitulate.  Later  Valais  was  reduced to   submission.  The  campaign  had  lasted  only   three  weeks.  The offer  of   mediation  by   the   European  powers   did   not  arrive  till   all was  over. nons.

'The  Sonderbund  war  was  a  war  of   principles  between  a   centralizing lay   policy   and   a   cantonal  sectarian  policy.  The   Jesuits and   other  religious  orders  were  expelled  from  each  canton  occupied by   the  federal  troops.  Then  the   people  were  compelled to   admit  the   Radicals  to   power,  to   withdraw  from  the   Sonderbund, and   amend  the   cantonal  constitution.  At   Freiburg,  the new  Council,  taken  from  the   Radical  minority,  amended  the   constitution and   governed   the   canton,  contrary  to   democratic  principles, without  consulting  the   mass  of   the   people,   who   were known  to   be   hostile  to   the   revolution.

e   Radicals,  by   defeating  the   Catholics,  acquired  the   mastery of   Switzerland,  and  have  continued  to   hold  it.

Ihe  Federal  Constitution  of   1848, - The  victorious  Radicals reorganized  Switzerland  according  to   their  own  ideas.  The  Diet appointed  a   committee  to   draft  a   new  constitution - the   Constitution of   1848.   This   established  a   Federal  State  (Bundesstaat) instead  of   the   Federation  of   States  (Staatenbund)  created  by   the Pact  of   1815.   It   retained  the   formula  "The  people   of   the   22 sovereign  Cantons  form  the   Swiss  Confederation  "   and  copied from  the  discarded  Articles  of   Confederation  of   the  United States  the   assertion  that   the   Cantons  are  sovereign  and   exercise all   the   rights   not   conferred  on   the   federal  power.  But   it   required the   cantons  to   ask   of   the   Confederation  the   guarantee  of   their constitutions,  and   determined  the   conditions  to   which  these  must conform :

1.   That  these  constitutions  shall  contain  nothing  contrary  to the   provisions  of   the   federal  constitution.

2.   That  they   shall   insure  the   enjoyment  of   political   rights   according to   republican  forms  (representative  or   democratic).

3.   That   they   shall   have   been   accepted  by   the   people,   and   shall have  a   provision  for   amendment  when  demanded  by   a  majority of   the   voters.

All   political   alliances  are   forbidden  between  the   cantons.

There  are  thus  principles  and  political  forms  binding  for   all the   Swiss,   a   supreme  federal  public   law   which  gives   political unity   to   Switzerland.  This  supreme  law  conforms  to   Radical doctrine;  it   tolerates  none  but  republican  governments  (Neuchatel  declares  itself  independent  of   the   King   of   Prussia),  democratic governments  resting   on  universal  suffrage,  republics  in which  the   constitution  must  be   submitted  to   popular  vote,  and must  be   open   to   amendment  on   demand  of   the   majority.  The Swiss's  country  is   no   longer   only   his   canton  but   all   Switzerland. Before  1848   any  person  expelled  from  his  canton  became heimatslos,  a   man  without  a   country;  henceforth  every   Swiss  enjoys civil   rights   throughout  the   whole  extent  of   the   Confederation. The   federal  constitution  guarantees  to   him  equality  of rights,   freedom  of   marriage,  of   commerce,  of   industry,  of   the press,  of   association,  and   of   worship. tion.

The  constitution  divides  the   powers  between  the   canton  and the   Confederation.  The  canton  retains  its   power  of   legislation in   civil   and   penal   matters,  in   affairs  of   police,   public   worship,   education, public   highways,  military   service,  in   the   appointment  of

officers,  and   in   taxation;  but   it   is   subject   to   the   federal  laws.  The Confederation  has   power  to   manage  foreign  relations,  the   army, customs  duties,  postal  affairs,  and   the   coinage.  Henceforward Switzerland  has  some  institutions  in   common - one  postal  system, one   tariff   (all   internal  customs  duties  were  abolished),  one federal  coinage,  one   federal  system  of   weights  and   measures  (the French  metric  system),  a   federal  army   directed  by   a   central  general staff.   The   Swiss  army,  reorganized  in   the   revision  of   1874, is   a   national  force,   recruited  by   a   universal  compulsory  service for   short  terms  (42   to   80   days).   Young   men  pass   in   it   only   the time  necessary  for   learning  to   manage  arms  and   to   execute  military movements,  under  the   command  of   officers  who   remain  ordinary citizens.

The  new  constitution  institutes  three  organs  of   government, invested  with  the   three  powers  recognised  by   the   theories  in vogue  at   that   time.  The   Federal  Assembly  exercises  "   the   legislative power."   The   Federal  Council,  'composed  of   seven  members elected   for   three   years   by   the   Assembly,  holds  "   the   executive power";   each   of   the   seven  takes  charge   of   a   department; one  of   the   seven,   designated  each  year   by   the   Assembly,  acts  as President  of   the   Council.  The  Federal  Tribunal,  elected  by   the Assembly,  has   "   the   judicial   power,"   but   has   not  the   right,   as   in America,  to   disregard  legislative  acts  that  are,   in   its   judgment, contrary  to   the   constitution.

The  Federal  Assembly  is   not  a  single   body   representing  the Swiss  people,   as   the   democratic  school  demanded;  it   is   composed, on   the   model  of   the   United  States, of   two   Chambers:  the   National Council,  elected  directly  by   all   the   voters,  in   the   proportion  of one  for   every  20,000  inhabitants;  and  the  Council  of   States (Standerath),  composed  of   two  members  from  each  canton.  For the   election  of   the   Federal  Council  and   the   judges   of   the   Federal Tribunal  the   two   houses  meet  as  one   body.   The   members of   both  councils  receive  pay   for   their  services,  the   members  of the   Council  of   States  receiving  it   from  their  cantons.  The   federal government  has   a   fixed  residence  assigned  to   it,   the   city   of Berne,  which  becomes  the   federal  capital.

By   its   tenderness  for   the   forms  of   cantonal  sovereignty,  and by   the   division  of   the   Federal  Assembly,  the   Constitution  of 1848   is   a   compromise  between  the   traditional  independence  of the   cantons  and   the   ideal  of   centralization  urged   by   the   Radical party.  The  Committee  of   Revision  expressed  this  point   clearly in   its   report:   "   If   Switzerland  is   no   longer   in   the   condition  for

which  the   Pact  of   1815   was   instituted,  no  more  is   it   in   a   condition suitable  for   a   unitary   government - a   new   Helvetic  Republic. .   .   .   Whatever  advance  the   national  spirit   may   have  made,  the cantonal  spirit   is   still   deeply   ingrained  in   Switzerland.  The unitary  system  might   perhaps  be   introduced,  but   it   could  not   be maintained.  .   ."

The  constitution  was  submitted  to   popular  vote  and  was  declared to   have  been  adopted  by   the   people   of   fifteen  cantons  and one   half-canton.  In   this   number  Freiburg  is   included,  although there  had   been   no  popular   vote  there - the   Radical  Council  undertaking to   answer  for   the   people   (see   p.   268).   In   four   cantons, where  a   majority  of   the   votes  actually  cast  was  against   the   new constitution,  a   majority  in   its   favour  was  made  out   by   adding   to the   minority  voting   yes   the   votes  of   those  who   had   failed  to   take part   in   the   election.*

The  Swiss  nation  dates  from  the   Constitution  of   1848.  The unity   established  by   the   Radicals  has   not   been  disputed;  civil wars  have  ceased ; f   the   Swiss  of   all   the   cantons  have  become j accustomed  to  regard   each  other  as   fellow-countrymen,  and  to govern  themselves  according  to   the   same  democratic  spirit.   Coinciding with   the   introduction  of   railways,  the   constitution ushered  in   a   period   of   unwonted  prosperity.  The   people   of   Switzerland, proverbial   up   to   that   date   for   rustic   qualities,   have   since made  themselves  notable  for   their  manufactures,  for   the   comfort everywhere  observable  among  them,  for   the   perfection  of   their schools  and  for  their  political  training.  The  population  has increased  from  2,390,000  in   1850   to   3,300,000  in   1896.

Establishment  of   Direct  Popular  legislation. - After  1848   the I history   of   Switzerland  is   no   longer   made  up   of   revolutions,  risngs,  and  civil  wars:  these  are  replaced  by   amendments  of   the onstitution.     From  1830   to   1873   there  were  eighty-three  contitutional  changes  in   the   cantons,  and   the   movement  still   goes n.     All   the   cantonal  constitutions  have  been  remodelled;  there emains  now  only   one  of   earlier  date  than  1848;   the   oldest,  that f Berne,   made  in   1846,   was  modified  in   1893.

The   thing   that   gives   interest  to   this   movement  is   a   phenomenon unique   in    history  - the    experiment   of    direct   legislative action  by   the   people.      This   has   been   introduced  in   two   forms -

*   The   four   were  Schwytz,  Zug,   Valais,  and  Lucerne.  All   the   Catholic
- antons  had  given   majorities  against  the  new  constitution. f The  only   exceptions  have  been  the  royalist  attempt  in   Neuchatel  in 856,   and   certain  fights   in   the   Italian  canton  of   Ticino.

the   Initiative  and   the   Referendum.  The  Initiative  is   the   right granted  to   any  sufficiently  numerous  group  of   citizens  to   propose a   change   of   law,   and   to   require   the   government  to   submit the  question  to  the   judgment  of   the   people.  The  Referendum is   the   right   given   to   the   people   to   have   a   direct  vote  o&gt;n  any   bill passed  by   the   legislature.  These  two  contrivances  aim  to   give the   people   a   direct  voice  in   the   making   of   laws;   they   constitute a   system  wholly   new   in   Europe.  In   the   representative  governments of   European  states,  the   people   have  only   a   general   political power;  they   are  only   choosers  of   men  to   govern.  In   all   the   Swiss cantons,  since  1848,   the   people,   in   addition  to   this   right   of   choosing their   governing  agents,   have  the   right   of   collaborating  in making  the   constitution,  and   in   many  cantons  in   the   passage  of laws.

In   order  to   understand  the   very  complicated  history  of   this innovation,  we  must  rigorously  distinguish:  I.   Between  the   Initiative and   the   Referendum;  2.   Between  constitutions  and   laws; 3.   Between  federal  and   cantonal  institutions.

Initiative  and   Referendum  in   Changing  the  Constitution. - The Radicals,  as  early   as  1830,   laid   down  the   principle  that   the   people alone  have  the   right   to   ordain  their  constitution;  that   a   representative assembly   ought   not  exercise  this   power,   its   only   function being   to   draw  up   a   draft   for   acceptance  by   the   people.  This principle  came  down  from  the   Helvetic  Republic  of   1798,   which got   it   from   the   French  republicans  in   the   plebiscite   of   ratification. All   the   cantonal  constitutions  made  after  1830   declared  the   approval of   the   people   to   be   essential  for   establishing  or  amending a   constitution  (Freiburg,  the   sole   exception,  did   not  adopt   thei doctrine  till   1857).

This  principle  of   popular  sovereignty  led,   by   inevitable  consequence, to   the   right   of   Initiative.  This  is,   at   bottom,  the   right to   demand  that  the   people   be   allowed  to   say   whether  they   wish a  change  of   constitution.  In   most  of   the   constitutions  made from  1830   to   1848   the   doctrine  is   not   found;  the   representative assemblies  have  the   right   of   proposing  changes.  Only   a   few cantons  (Schaffhausen,  Aargau,  Bale-country)  ordained  that  a petition  from  a   certain  number  of   citizens  should  oblige   the   government to   consult  the   people.  Further,  the   "   men  of   the   just mean  "   (p.   264),   partisans  of   constitutional  stability,  who   had drafted  most  of   the   new  constitutions,  had  inserted  in   them  a clause  prohibiting  changes  till   after  the   lapse   of   a   certain  period, The  result  was  to   compel  the   people   to   violate  the   constitutions

y   bringing  about  changes  before  the   end   of   the   term  set.  The tight   of   initiative  thus   became  recognised  as  the   Radicals  obtained sway.

In   1848   the   federal  constitution  made  the   Radical  doctrine  public law   in   Switzerland.  It   declared  that   every  constitution  needs to   be   accepted  by   the   people   (this   is   the   Referendum)  and   ought to   have   a   provision  for   amendment  "   when  a   majority  of   the   citizens demand  it "   (this   is   the   Initiative).  Some  cantons  later made  the   initiative  easier  to   exercise  by   providing  that   a   certain number  of   citizens  might   present  a   demand  for   revision.

The  principles  laid  down  for   the   cantonal  constitutions  by this   Constitution  of   1848   were  applied   to   the   federal  system  also. The  federal  constitution  was  submitted  for   the   approval  of   the people,   and   did   not  go   into   effect  until  it   had   been  accepted  by a   majority  both  of   the   voters  and   of   the   cantons.  It   could  be changed  at   any   time  on  the   initiative  of   50,000  voters  (in   1874 this   number  was  reduced  to   30,000).  It   was  not  thought  necessary in   1848   to   provide  for   the   case  of   single   amendments;  an amendment  was  adopted  in   1891   which  obliges  the   federal  government to   submit  to   popular  vote  any  amendment  proposed  by 50,000  voters.  So   a  constitutional  amendment  drawn  up   by   a private   individual  and   indorsed  by   50,000  voters  must  be   presented for   the   judgment  of   the   whole  body   of   citizens,  no  matter what   the   opinion   of   the   Assembly;  and   if   it   receives  a   majority   of the   voters  and   of   the   cantons,  it   becomes  part   of   the   constitution. (A   canton  is   held   to   approve  if   its   voters  give   a   majority in   favour.)

Initiative  and   Referendum  in   Ordinary  Legislation. - Direct  intervention in   making  ordinary  laws  does  not  seem  at   first   blush a   necessary  consequence  of   popular  sovereignty.  The  representative legislature   is   regarded   as   the   lawmaking  power.   So   the evolution  was  slower  here  than  in   the   case  of   the   constitution.

The   first   movement  was  made  in   1831   by   the   council  charged with   drawing  up   a   constitution  for   St.   Gall,   and   it   was  made  in the   name  of   a   philosophic  theory.  Major  Diog,   a   disciple  of Hegel,   demanded  for   the   people   the   right   of   ratifying  the   laws. " For   me,"   he   said,   "   the   main  question   is   on  what  principle  our ork   ought   to   proceed.  I   know  but   one  principle - the   soverignty   of   the   people.  The   sovereign  is   supreme;  his   will   is   law. hear   of   a   representative  sovereignty,  but  persons  exercising delegated  power  are  not  sovereign.  We   have  heard  that   the eople   are  to   control  their   own  affairs;  but   if   the   Grand  Council

18

is   to   be   a   guardian  over  them,   they   have  not  such  control." When  the  advantages  of   the  representative  system  were  urged in   reply,   he   answered:  "   There  is   a   tendency  here   to   take   the   welfare of   the   people   as   the   fundamental  principle;  but   the   question is   of   rights,   not  of   welfare.  If   it   were  of   welfare  we  might   be told   that   constitutional  monarchy  would  'be   best."  The  debate ended  in   a   compromise.  It   was   decided  that  all   laws  passed   by the   Grand  Council  should  be   subject   to   the   approval  of   the   people; but   only   if   this   were  demanded  within  a   certain  time.  This potential  or  optional  referendum  was  called  the   veto,   in   memory of   the   Roman  Tribunes.  But  in   this   timid  form  the   legislative Referendum  had  no  great  success  in   Saint-Gall:  there  were  9190 voters  in   favour  of   the   constitution  and   11,091  against   it;   12,692 voters  failed  to   cast  their  votes.  These  latter  were  treated  as having  voted  yes,  and   the   constitution  was   declared  adopted.

The  veto,   introduced  at   Lucerne  in   1841,   was  compromised  in the   eyes  of   the   Radicals  by   the   use  the   Catholic  party  made of   it.   It   reappeared  under  the   name  of   the   Referendum.-  This was  an  old   word  with  a  new  meaning.  In   the   old   Swiss  Confederation and   in   the   Grisons  and   Valais,  which  were  themselves federations,  the   delegates  were  simply   agents,  not  sovereign  legislators. In   the   federal  Diet  they   discussed  but   did   not   decide; they   met  ad   audiendum  et   referendum,  to   hear  propositions  and refer  them  to  their  constituents.  In   popular  usage  the  word referendum  came  to   mean  the   decision  given   by   the   people   on   the propositions  brought  to   them  by   their  envoys.  This  old   referendum disappeared;  the   Grisons,  which  kept   it   till   1853,   was compelled  by   the   federal  government  to   discontinue  it   as  contrary to   the   Constitution  of   1848,   because  the   votes  were  counted! by   communes  and  not  by   the   simple   num'ber  of   individuals  for and  against.  But  the   word  referendum  had  begun  to   be   used for   the   right   of   the   people   to   reject   the   acts  passed   by   their representatives.

At   first   there   was  only   the   optional   referendum.  Any   act   passec by   the   representative  assembly  was   binding:  the   people   had   simply the   right   of   demanding  that   it   be   put   to   general   vote;  anc they   could  only   accept  or  reject   the   whole  act.  The  optiona referendum  was  still  only   the   veto.

The  small  ancient  cantons  of   the   mountains  had  from  tinn immemorial  practised  direct  government  by   the   assembled  peopl' (Lands gemeinde).  Once  a  year   the   people   gathered  in   the   opei air   on  a   spot   consecrated  by   tradition.  The  government  pre

jented   bills   and   the   people   voted  on   them  by   show  of   hands;   thus :he   people   made  their  laws  directly.  The  government  had  not even  the   exclusive  right   of   proposing  bills;   any   citizen  had   the right   to   propose  a   bill,   and   a   vote  of   the   people   was  enough   to make  it   a   law.  (In   Uri   it   was  requisite  that  seven  citizens  of seven  different  families  should  unite  in   proposing).  Six   cantons retained  this   system  till   1848.   But   it   was  practicable  only with  a  small  body   of   citizens  deciding  very  simple   questions. Schwytz  and  Zug   replaced  it   by   a   representative  assembly.  The general  meeting  has  been  preserved  in   two*  cantons,  Uri  and Claris,   and   in   four   half-cantons,  the   two   Unterwaldens  and   the two   Appenzells.

In   practice   the   optional  referendum  was   little  more  than  a   fiction; the   right   of   the   people   to   the   legislative   power  was  affirmed in   principle,  but   it   was  only   on  special   occasions  that   the   right was  brought  into  play;   the   laws  continued  to   be   made  by   the representative  assembly.  The  cantons  having  the  Landsgemeinde  were  the   only   ones  in   which  the   people   voted  directly   on all   legislation.  There  was  much  hesitation  in   the   other  cantons about  giving   the   people   the   means  of   really   expressing  their  judgment on   all   proposed   laws.  A   beginning  was  timidly   made  with a   referendum  confined  to   financial  affairs.  On   the   occasion  of building  a   railway,  Neuchatel,  in   1858,   made  the   referendum  obligatory for   any  appropriation  of   500,000  francs  or  upwards; Valais  adopted  it   in   1861  for   any  sum  exceeding  a  million  of francs.  The  first  complete  experiment  of   the   obligatory  referendum in   the   passage  of   laws  was  made  by   Bale-country,  a   halfcanton:  its   Constitution  of   1863   ordained  that  twice  a   year   the government  must  submit  to  vote  of   the   citizens  all   laws  and decrees  of   general  concern.

Side  by   side  with  the   movement  leading  to  the  obligatory referendum,  the   Radical  party   had   carried  on  an  agitation  for   the right   of   popular   Initiative.  The  idea  first   appeared  in   the   canton of   Vaud,  in   connection  with  the   change  of   constitution  of 1845.   There  were  there,   it   was  said,   especially  among  the   workingmen  of   Vevey,  revolutionists  connected  with  the   French  secret societies  of   the   time;   their   opponents  reproached  them  with reading  Buonarotti  and  with  holding  communistic  principles. These  men  proposed  to  provide  in   the   new  constitution  for   the " Organization  of   Labour."  The  council  which  drew  up   the   constitution rejected   the   idea;   but   it   took   a   new  step   in   the   direction of   popular  initiative,  by   providing  that  any  measure  urged   by

8000  citizens  should  be   examined  by   the   Grand  Council  and   submitted to   the   assemblies  of   the   communes.

The  Initiative  was  adopted  in   1848   by   the   two  cantons  which abolished  their  Lands gemeinde  (Schwytz  and  Zug) ; in   1852   it   was adopted  by   Aargau.  It   began  at   that  time  to   be   regarded  as the   complement  of   the   referendum.  Bale-country,  in   1863,   gave to   any   1500  voters  the   right   to   propose  changes  of   law.  The people  thus  got,   not  only   the   right   to   reject   measures  proposed by   others,   but   to   propose  measures  themselves.  From  that   time onward  the   two  institutions,  the   Initiative  and   the   Referendum, were  ordinarily  advocated  by   the   same  party,  and   were  incorporated together   in   every  new  constitution.  Both  rest  on   the   principle of   direct  government  by   the   people.  The  voters  are  not only   the   makers  of   constitutions - they   are  the   true  lawmakers, proposing  laws  by   the   initiative  and   adopting  them  by   the   referendum.

This  system  has  step   by   step   won  acceptance  in   all   the   cantons- sometimes  in   the   incomplete  form  of   optional  referendum, or  with  a   restriction  to   financial  measures.  The  decisive  success was  at   Zurich's  revision  of   her   constitution  in   1869.   The   committee managing  the   reform  movement,  in   demanding  the   referendum and   initiative,   had   stated  the   case  succinctly:  "   The   question is   of   converting  our  apparent  sovereignty  into  a  real sovereignty  of   the   people,  to   transfer  the   dominant  power  and force  from  the   hands  of   a   few   to   the   strong   shoulders  of   the   community." The   people   supported  the   proposal.  In   the   convention called   to   draw   up   the   new  constitution,  Suter,   a   Liberal, proposed  to  confine  themselves  to  the  veto.  Someone  made answer:  "   In   the   ship   of   state,   as   Suter  would  arrange  matters, the   Grand  Council  would  hold  the   tiller  while  the   sovereign,  on the   wharf,   would  watch  it   directing  the   ship.   That  is   contempt of   the   people,   of   its   ability   to   manage  the   ship   of   state.  We,   on the   contrary,  have  full   confidence  in   the   people.  The   referendum and  initiative  are  new  rights.  .  .   In   opposition  to   the   representative system,   a   new  period   of   direct  democratic  legislation by   the   people   has   begun.  And  Mr.   Suter  has   just   told   us   that the   Grand  Council  is,   in   the   first   instance,  the   holder  of   the   legislative power,   the   people   being   only   auxiliaries  in   the   work.  We, on  the   contrary,  say   that  the   legislative  power  resides  in   the people,  and  in   exercising  the   power,  they   use  the   help   of   the Grand  Council." tion

The  Constitution  of   1869   dropped  the   title  of   Grand  Council,

d   declared  that   the   people   of   Zurich  exercise  the   legislative power,  "   with  the   assistance  of   the   Cantonal  Council."  The Cantonal  Council  has   no  other  function  than  to  prepare  bills. Every  bill   presented  by   the   initiative  of   5000   citizens  or  supported by   one-third  of   the   members  of   the   Cantonal  Council,  is required  to   be   submitted  to   the   people.  Twice  a   year   the   people assemble  by   communes  and   vote  on  all   such  bills.  The   bills  are divided  into  three  categories:  I.   Constitutional  amendments, laws,   concordats.  2.   Bills  which  the   Council  is   incompetent  to pass   definitively.  3.   Bills  which  the   Council  is   empowered  to enact,   but   which  it   prefers   to   submit  to   popular   vote.*

This  system  was  quickly  adopted  by   most  of   the   other  large German  cantons,  Thurgau,  Soleure,  Berne  (without  the  initiative), Lucerne  in   1869.   It   was  computed  that   in   1860   1,030,000 inhabitants  of   Switzerland  lived  under  a  purely  representative system,  and   that   in   1870   the   number  was  only   330,000.

The   movement  has   gone  on,   but   more  slowly.  In   1889   there remained  but   one  canton,  Freiburg,  without  any   form  of   direct popular  action  in   making  laws.  There  were  still  four  cantons retaining  the   Lands gemeinde,  six   and   a   half   cantons  having   the obligatory  referendum  and  initiative,  four  and  a   half   having   the initiative  and  optional  referendum,  and  six  having  restricted forms  of   the   one  or   the   other.

Federal  Constitutional  Changes. - The  Radicals,  while  establishing the   legislative   referendum  in   the   cantons,  were  urging its   introduction  into   the   federal  system  also.  'The   first   effort  to carry   the   point   failed ;   amendments  embodying  the   scheme  were rejected  by   the   people   in   1865.   In   1869   a   majority  of   the   National Council  voted  that   the   constitution  ought   to   be   brought "into  harmony  with  the  needs  of   the   time."  As   in   1848,   the Radical  party  wished  to   increase  the   powers  of   the   federal  government. The   draft   of   a   constitution  approved  by   the   two Houses  in   1872   placed   under  federal  control  the   civil  law,   railoads,   public   schools,  liberty   of   worship,  emigration  agencies, nsurance,  etc.  It   also  established  the  referendum  and  the nitiative.

Then  appeared  an  opposition,  alive  since  1798   but  overhadowed  by   the  struggle  for  democratic  institutions,  be-

*   In   the   German  cantons,  where  the   politicians  are  educated  in   the   Gernan  public  law,   little  attention  is   paid   to   the   distinction  between  the   conititution  and  ordinary  laws.  This  is   particularly  true  of   constitutional imendments.

tween  those  desiring  a  strong  national  government  and  the champions  of   cantonal  rights.  The  National  or   Unitary  party is   made  up   in   the   main  from  the   German  Protestant  cantons; being   radical  and  free  from  clerical  domination,  it   inclines  to unify   the   institutions  of   all   Switzerland  and   to   intervene  in   the government  of   the   cantons  to   establish  purely   lay   education.  The Cantonalist  party   is   made  up   of   two  sets  of   men,  who   dislike  the federal  power   for   two   different  reasons.  The   French  Protestant cantons,  radical  and   free  from  clerical  control,  wish  to   preserve their  administrative  autonomy  and  their  Latin  customs,  which they   believe  to   be   threatened  by   the   German  majority.  The Catholic  cantons,  though  almost  exclusively  German,  defend clerical  control  of   the   schools  against   the   German  Radicals.

In   1872   the   coalition  of   the   French  and   Catholic  cantons  defeated the   new  constitution:  the   vote  stood  256,000   voters  and   9 cantons  in   favour,  260,000  voters  and  13   cantons  against.  The National  Council  at   once  drafted  a   new  scheme,  in   which,  to   conciliate the   French  cantons,  private   law   was  omitted  from  the subjects  under  federal  jurisdiction,  and   the   cantons  retained  control of   their  troops;  but   the   referendum  and  the   provision  for secular  schools  were  retained:  "The  cantons  shall  provide  for public   schools,  which  shall  be   adequate  and  placed   exclusively under  the   control  of   the   civil   authority.  Education  shall  be   compulsory and,   in   the   public   schools,  gratuitous.  The  public schools  shall  be   so  conducted  as   to   be   capable  of   being   attended by   the   adherents  of   all   religions.  The   Confederation  shall  take measures  against  any  canton  not   fulfilling  this   obligation."  This time  the   French  cantons  joined   the   German  ones;  the   Catholics were  left  alone.  The  Constitution  of   1874   was  adopted  by 340,000  votes  and  14^   cantons  in   favour,  against  198,000  votes and  7\   cantons  opposed.  There  were  214  voters  for   every  1000 inhabitants - an  exceptional  proportion.  The  constitution  established the   referendum  in   the   optional  form - the   request  of   30,000 voters  being   required  in   order  to   have  any  given   bill   put   to   the popular  vote.  It   had   no  provision  for   the   initiative,  even   in   proposing amendment  of   the   constitution.

The  federal  referendum  instituted  in   1874   has   been  frequently used  and   has   caused  the   rejection  of   a   number  of   bills   after   their passage  by   the   legislative  bodies.  It   has   been  used  as  a   means of   bringing  a  coalition  between  the   two  minority  parties,  the French  and  the   Catholic,  against  the   German  majority  of   Protestant Radicals.  In   1882   the   federal  assembly  passed   a   bill   es-

tablishing  a   Secretary  of   Education  to   watch  over  the   execution cf   the   constitutional  clauses  relating  to   schools;  the   referendum was  demanded  on   it   by   188,000  signatures,  and  at   the   general vote  it   was  rejected   by   316,000   votes  against   175,000.

The  constitution  has   not   been  revised  as  a   whole  since  1874, but   several  amendments  have  been  made.  These  were  proposed by   the   federal  Assembly  and   voted  by   the   people.  Up   to   1891 there  were  five   so  proposed  and  adopted:  (i)   To   restore  to   the cantons  the   right   of   inflicting  capital   punishment  (1879);   (2)   To permit   the   establishment  of   a   federal  monopoly  in   the   manufacture and   sale   of   alcohol,   1885;   (3)   To   place   copyright  under  federal control,   1887;   (4)   To   give   the   federal  government  a   monopoly of   issuing  paper  currency,  1891 ; (5)   Giving   any   50,000  voters the   right   to   propose  amendments  of   the   constitution,  1891.

The  fifth  of   these  amendments  has   worked  a  profound  transformation by   greatly  increasing  the   direct  control  of   the   citizens over  the   government.  It   has   led   in   practice   to   the   establishment, under  a   disguise,  of   the   popular  initiative  not  only   in   constitutional but   also   in   legislative   changes.  For,   since  no  clear  distinction is   made  between  the   constitution  and  ordinary  laws,   the demand  of   50,000  citizens  compels  the   government  to  submit to   popular  vote  as  a  constitutional  amendment,  any  measure whatsoever;  and  if   the   people   adopt   it,   it   goes   into   effect.  Thus, in   1893,   the   popular   initiative  was  used  by   the   Anti-Semites  to propose  and  carry  a  constitutional  amendment  forbidding  the bleeding  of   animals  in   the   manner  practised  in   certain  Jewish rites.*  "   When  the   Swiss  democracy  was  induced  to  take  this leap   in   the   dark,   nobody   dreamed  of   the   unlimited  scope  of   this new  popular  right.  The  reputation  of   the   Swiss  for   intelligence and   democratic  maturity  ...  is   going   to   be   put   to   the   rudest test  "   (Borgeaud).

Transformations  of   the  Political  Parties  since  1848. - The decisive  victory   of   the   Radicals  in   1848   set   all   the   institutions  of

*   We  are  not  without  examples  in   this  country  of   confusion  between matters  proper  to  the  constitution  and  matters  for  ordinary  legislative action.  With  us  the  mass  of   somewhat  petty  provisions  in   the  newer State  constitutions  is   primarily  due  to   distrust  of   the   legislative  bodies not   to   any   theoretic  hankerings  for   popular  initiative.  In   Switzerland  the original  Federal  Constitution  of   1874  sets  the  example  of   descending  to many  trivial  matters  which  have  no  proper  place   in   a  constitution  :   it   is not   to   be   wondered  at   that,   with  theories  of   popular  initiative  to   be   gratified, later   amendments  and  the  new  cantonal  constitutions  should  go farther  afield  in   the   same  direction.- TR.

Switzerland  upon  a   course  of   democratic  evolution  which  became very  pronounced  after  the   change  of   1874   and   which  has   already led   to   a   direct   government  by   the   citizens.  No   civilized  people has   yet   gone  so   far   in   this   path.   But   this   triumph  of   Radical policy   has   not  resulted  in   giving   the   Radical  leaders  constant possession  of   power  in   all   the   cantons.  Under  the   new  institutions the   old   parties   have   succeeded  in   regaining  control.  In order  to   give   themselves  a   fighting   chance  in   the   contest  with   the Radicals,  they   accepted  the   democratic  constitutions  voted  by the   people,   without  any  attempt  to   return  to   the   previous  system. They   attacked,  not   the   principles,  but   the   administration of   the   Radicals.

During  the   years  of   reaction  following  1848   the   Conservatives and  Liberals  regained  power  in   several  cantons  (Berne,  Balecity)   and   the   Catholic  party  reconquered  all   the   Catholic  cantons. The   Radical  party   ordinarily  retained  the   majority  in   the federal  bodies  and   in   the   Protestant  cantons.  But   it   maintained its   hold   only   by   vigilant   resistance  to   the   three  opposing  parties, sometimes  in   coalition.  These  contests  at   the   elections  for   the possession  of   power,  combined  with  the   movement  for   direct  government, have   kept   contemporary  Switzerland  in   heated  political excitement;  but,   except  in   the   Italian  canton  of   Ticino,  agitation has   always   been   kept   within  peaceful  limits  and   carried  on by   methods  accepted  by   all.

The  history  of   these  contests  is   further  complicated  by   the coalitions  and   changes  of   party   names.  (At   Geneva  the   old   Conservatives became   the   Independents,  and   later  the   Democratic party.)  I   confine  myself   here  to   indicating  the   general   development of   the   parties.

The  Protestant  Conservatives  have  become  few   in   number  and hardly  count  any  more.  In   the  Protestant  cantons  even  the Church  has  been  given   a   democratic  organization;  neither  pastors nor  communicants  are   held  to   a   profession  of   faith;   in   several German  cantons  all   the   pastors  are  elected  for   a   limited period.  The  political  struggle  in   the   Protestant  cantons  lay   between the   Liberals  and   Radicals;  in   those  that   are   French  the Radicals  maintain  their  power,  whereas  in   the   German  ones  there has   been  an  oscillation  rather  than  a   definite  preponderance  of either  party. eral

The  Catholic  party   has   been  reconstituted  in   all   the   Catholic districts,  often  under  a   democratic  name.  Its   policy   has   been to   gain   a   majority  by   appealing  to   Catholic  sentiment  and   to

:onal   patriotism  against   the   federal  government  controlled  by the   Protestants  and   the   enemies  of   ecclesiasticism.  The  federal constitution  of   1848   had   abolished  all   that   still   remained  of   the old   ecclesiastical  regime   in   the   cantons,  suppressing  all   power of   the   clergy   and   all   church  taxes.  But   it   did   not   impose   a   cornpi   etc  separation  of   Church  and  state;  every  canton  retained  its recognised  churches;  the   government  settled  the   relations  with the   Church  and  supervised  the   clergy.  It   also  prescribed  and supervised  the  work  of   the  schools.  On  these  two  matters, Church  and  schools,  the   Catholic  party  made  its   contest.

It   tried   to   get   laws   passed   establishing  liberty   of   the   Church, - that  is   to   say,   abolishing  State  supervision  of   the   clergy,  or,   at   the   least,   to   get   men  elected  who   would  not  exercise  the right   of   supervision.  It   tried  to   keep   the   primary   schools  under the   control  of   the   priests   and   to   maintain  in   them  Catholic  teaching- also,   perhaps,  to  prevent  the   rigorous  application  of   the iprovision  making  education  compulsory.  The  proportion  of children  going   to   school  in   the   Protestant  cantons  (i   in   5)   is   in jfact almost  double  that   of   the   Catholic  cantons  (i   in   9).   In   the mixed  cantons  the   proportion  falls  between  these  figures.

The  Catholic  party   kept   the   power   in   the   J\   cantons  that   made &lt;he   Sonderbund:  all   of   these  rejected  the   new  Constitution  of 1874.      Of   all   the   Catholic  cantons  Ticino  is   the   only   one   in i^nich  the   Liberal-Radical  party   has   been  able  to   dispute  the possession  of   power  with  the   Conservative  Catholic  party.     In he   mixed  cantons  the   Catholic  party   is   steadily  in   the   minority ind   in   dogged   opposition  to   the   government.     These  cantons  are eneva,   Berne,   Soleure,  Thurgau,  St.   Gall,   Bale-country;  Appenell   is   divided  into   two   half-cantons,  the   one   Protestant  and   the :her   Catholic.

After  the   Vatican  Council  of   1870   the   Catholic  opposition  took ie   form   of   an  open  conflict.     The   Old   Catholics,  rejecting  the ctrine  of   Infallibility,  separated  themselves  from  the   general ody   of   those  in   communion  with  Rome.     The   Protestant  govnments  of   the   cantons,  holding  the   decrees  of   the   Vatican  Counto   be   null,   recognised  the   Old   Catholics  as   having   the   same ghts   as   those  who   accepted  the   decrees,  and   undertook  to   mainn   in   the   Church  those  Old   Catholic  priests   who   had   been  exmmunicated  by   their  bishop.     In   the   canton  of   Geneva,  belonerto   the   diocese  of   Freiburg,  the   quarrel   connected  itself   with previous  conflict  of   powers.     The   Pope   had   instituted  a   vicar-

general  for   the   canton  in   spite   of   the   government.  In   St.   Gall it   took   the   form   of   a   strife   with   the   Jesuits.

The  struggle  began   between  the   governments  and  the   bishops. The  bishop  of   Soleure  was  deprived  and  banished:  the   Pope, nearly   all   the   priests,   and   the   great   majority   of   the   Catholic  laity protested.  Then  the   question  of   sovereignty  came  to   the   front: Does  the   right   to   regulate  the   ecclesiastical  organization  belong to   the   Church  or   to   the   civil   power?  Some  of   the   governments (Berne,  Soleure,  Aargau,  Geneva)  settled  the   question  by   getting the   people   to   adopt   a   sort  of   civil   constitution  of   the   clergy   which altered  the   territorial  divisions  without  consulting  the   Pope,   and established  election  of   the   priests   by   the   laity.   The   Catholics called  on   the   federal  government  to   protect  their   religious  liberty, but   the   federal  government  declared  that   the   cantons  had   not  exceeded their   constitutional  power.  Then  came  a  conflict  between Switzerland  and   the   Holy   See.  The  Pope   censured  the cantons  publicly;  the   federal  government  sent  away  the   Pope's nuncio;  the   Catholics  refused  to   vote  in   the   election  of   priests (1873).  The  Old  Catholics,  organized  into  a   "   Catholic-Christian Church,"  became,  as  a  result,  the   official  Catholic  Church.  The conflict  ended  in   a   schism;  in   Bernese  Jura   troops  were  employed to   put   down  Catholic  outbreaks  against  the   schismatic  priests. The  strife  lasted  till   after   the   election  of   Leo   XIII.  in   1878.

The  new  generation  which  has  assumed  the  direction  of   the Catholic  party   in   these  later  years   has   dropped  this   contest  regarding the   powers  of   the   state  and   the   Church.  A   Catholic Democratic  party   has   been  formed  which  uses  the   referendum  as a   weapon  against   the   centralizing  measures  of   the   Radicals.  This party   has   even  begun   to   demand  social  reforms.  The  Catholic Congress  of   1894   voted  to   organize  itself  into   a   Catholic  People's party;  and   it   founded  a   free   society   of   Swiss  Sociologists  composed of   Catholics.

In   the   only   Catholic  canton  in   which  the   power  of   the   Catholic party   has   been  disputed  (Ticino),  the   violent  contests  between the   Catholic  Conservatives  and  the   Radical-Liberals  led   finally to   a   civil   war,   followed  by   the   adoption  of   proportional  representation- a   change   that   may   be   the   beginning  of   a   new  evolution in   Swiss  institutions.  The  two  parties  were  about  equal   in numbers,  but  the   Conservatives,  in   order  to   maintain  their  hold on  power,   had   "   gerrymandered  "   the   electoral  districts  in   such   a way  as   to   make  sure  of   a   majority  of   the   representatives.  They refused  to   submit  to   the   people   the   question  of   changing  the   con-

st   tution   (1890).   The   Liberals  rose  in   insurrection,  ousted  the Conservative  office-holders,  and  established  a   provisional  government. The   federal  authorities,  compelled  to   intervene,  induced the   two  parties   to   accept  a   new  electoral  system,  long   advocated by   theoretical  writers  as  a  mode  of   protecting  minorities.  Instead of   giving   all   the   seats  to   the   party   having   the   majority  in the   district,  the   representation  is   shared  between  the   parties   in the   proportion  in   which  they   share  the   popular  vote.  Proportional representation,  adopted   in   Ticino  in   1891,   has   later   been introduced  in   Neuchatel,  Geneva,  and  Zug.   Its   champions  are agitating  for   its   adoption  throughout  Switzerland.

A   Socialist  agitation  has   also   been  developed  since  the   change of   constitution  in   1874.   Switzerland  remains  the  asylum  for political   refugees;  for   the   proscribed  Germans  of   1849,   the   proscribed French   Republicans  of   1851,   the   Italian  exiles,   the   Russian Liberals  and   Revolutionists,  the   refugees  of   the   Paris  Commune, the   German  Socialists.  In   Switzerland  the   International has   held   nearly   all   its   "   congresses  ";   there  the   German  Socialists, during  the   existence  of   the   exceptional  laws  against  them,  resumed the   publication  of   their   suppressed  journals   and   held   their i first   "   congress  "   (1880).  The  radical  governments  of   the   cantons and   the   federal  government  sustained  the   tradition,  except against  the   demands  of   the   German  Empire.  After  protesting Against   the   presence  of   the   German  spies   (the   Wohlgemuth  case), the   Federal  Council  so   far   yielded   as   to   expel   the   editors  of   the Socialist  journal.  Their  action  was  taken  only   against  refugees uspected  of   plotting   the   use  of   explosives - the   Russian  Nihilists and   the   Anarchists.

But   all   these   agitations  were  the   work  of   foreigners;  the   Swiss themselves  have  held  aloof  from  revolutionary  societies.  A eague  of   workingmen,  formed  in   1873,   was  dissolved  in   1880, or  want  of   support.  The  "   Swiss  Social  Democratic  party/' modelled  after  the   German  society,   has   hitherto  received  but   few adherents.

The   only   group  with  socialistic  tendencies  which  has   had   any nfluence  on  political  life   in   Switzerland  is   the   Griltli  Union,  a democratic  society  founded  in   1838,   composed  chiefly  of   Swiss artisans,  but   little  by   little  impregnated  with  Socialistic  ideas, hrongh  contact  with  foreign  Socialists.  Controlling  enough ^otes   to   set   in   motion  the   Federal  referendum  and   initiative,  the Jnion  has  demanded  social  reforms.  It   has  carried  through aws  regarding  inspection  of   factories  and  the   liability  of   em-

ployers,  and   instituting  a   Secretary  of   Labour  (the   secretary  has been  a   Socialist  leader).  It   has   even,   in   its   official  program,  substituted the   words  Social  Democracy  for   its   old   name  Liberal Democracy;  it   has  demanded  for  labourers  legal   protection against  arbitrary  dismissal  by   their  employers,  and  a   "   Democratic organization  of   factory   labour."  It   obtained  in   1894   the submission  to   popular  vote  of   a   bill   guaranteeing  to   every   Swiss citizen  "   the   right   to   an  employment  sufficiently  remunerative"; the   bill   was  rejected   by   308,000   votes  against   75,000.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.- See  Ch.-V.  Langlois,  "Manuel  de   Bibliogr.  Histo- rique,"  1896. DOCUMENTS.- Collections  of   the  parliamentary  documents  of   the cantons  may   be   found  in   detail  in   the   Swiss  bibliographies.  The  constitutional documents  are  gathered  together  in   the   official  collection,  '   ·   Sammlung   der  Bundesverfassung  und  der  .  .  .  1880,  in   Kraft  Bestehenden Kantonsverfassnngen,"  1880;  the  federal  legislative  documents  in   "Offizielle  Sammlung  der   das   Schweizerische  Staatsrecht  Betreffenden  Aktenstticke  .  .  .   seit   .   .   .   1848,"   20   vols.,   1849-87.  See   since  1890,   "   Annuaire Statistique  de   la   Suisse  "   (published  by   the   Bureau  de   Statistique).

For  the  narrative  of   political  events,  Miiller-Friedberg,  and  Escher, "Schweizerische  Annalen,"  since  1830;  and  since  1886,  K.   Hilty,  "   Politisches  Jahrbuch  der  Schweizerischen  Eidgenossenschaft,"  (i   vol.  each year),   perhaps  the   most  scientific  political  annual  in   Europe.

The  memoirs,  recollections,  and  private  papers  form  too  numerous  a group  to   be   given   in   detail.  See   especially  "   Ludwig  Snells  Leben  und Wirken,"  1858,  a  careful  account  of   the   origin   of   the   Radical  movement.

WORKS.- The  modern  political  history  of   Switzerland  is   better  known than  that  of   any   other  European  country,  and  more  readily  outlined  in general  works  ; it   is   enough   to   point   out   those  works  as   they   refer  to   the monographs  and  special  histories  of   the   cantons.

GENERAL  HISTORY  OF   EVENTS:  Henne  am  Khyn,  "   Gesch.  des  Schweizervolkes  .  .  .,"   vol.  iii.,   1878,   by   a  radical  patriot;  a  very  passionate description  of   political  struggles.- Daendliker,  "   Gesch.  der   Schweiz,"  new edit.,   vol.  iii.,   1895,   liberal  ;   a   handy   bibliogr.,  especially  for   economic hist- Vuillemin,  "   Hist,  de   la   Confederation  Suisse  .  .   .,"   2d   edit.,   vol. ii.,   1881.

HISTORIES  OF  DIFFERENT  PERIODS:  Hilty,  "   Oeffentliche  Vorlesungen iiber  die   Helvetik,"  1798   to   1803. - Tillier,   "   Gesch.  der   Eidgenossenschaft," 2  series.  Restoration  and  period  from  1830-48. - VanMuyden,  "La  Suisse sous  le   Pacte  de   1815,"   1890,   a   good   account. - Baumgartner,  "   Die   Schweiz und  ihre  Umgestaltungen,  1830-50,"  1853-65.- Feddersen,  "   Gesch.  der Schw.  Regeneration,"  1867.

HISTORIES  OF  THE  SONDERBUND  :   Dufour,  "   Campagne  du   Sonderbund  et Evenements  de  1856,"  1875.  The  author  was  general-in-chief  of   the   fed-

eial   army   in   the   Sonderbund  war. - Cretineau-Joly,  "   Hist,  du   Sonderbund," 2   vols.  ,   1850. - Esseiva,  "   Fribourg,  la   Suisse  et   le   Sonderbund,"  1882  ;   both written  from  the   Catholic  standpoint.

ON  THE  CATHOLIC  PARTY:  Woeste,  "Hist,  du   Culturkampf  en  Suisse, 1871-86,"  1887,   by   a   Belgian  Catholic. - Keller,  "   In   Rei   Memoriam,"  1882, Catholic. - Gareis  and   Zorn,   "   Staat  und  Kirche  in   der  Schweiz,"  3   vols., 1877,   treatise  on  relations  between  Church  and  state,  by   partisans  of   the sovereignty  of   the   lay   state.

ON  THE  SOCIALIST  PARTIES  :   Berghoff-Ising,  "   Die   Socialistische  Arbeiterbewegung  in   der  Schweiz,"  1895.  The  most  complete  and  scientific account.

HISTORY  OF   INSTITUTIONS. - On  the  history  of   federal  institutions,  the excellent  scientific  manuals  of   J.   Meyer,  "   Gesch.  des  Schweizerischen Bundesrechtes." - Blumer,  translated  into  French,  and  revised  by   Morel, "   Handbuch  des  Schweizerischen  Bundesstaatsrechts,"  3d   edit.,  1891-92. L.   von   Salia,   "   Schw.  Bundesrecht,"  2  vols.,  1891-92,  trans,  into  French, gives   an  account  of   the   practice  of   federal  and  administrative  law  since 1874. - Hilty,   "   Les   Constitutions  Federates  de   la   Suisse,"  1891,   a   very  solid historical  account. - Orelli's  account  in   the  Marquardsen  collection  is simply  a  popular  work. - Ch.   Borgeaud,  ' '   Etablissement  et   Revision  des Constitutions,"  1893,   gives   a   very   intelligent  view  of   the   evolution  of   federal constitutional  law.

On  the  history  of   the  referendum  and  initiative,  Curti,  "   Gesch.  der Schw.  Volksgesetzgebung,"  2d  edit.,  1885.  Very  instructive. - Stussi, ·''Referendum  und  Initiative  in   den  Schw.  Kantonen,"  1894. - A.   Keller, '   Das  Volksinitiativrecht  nach  den  Schw.  Kantonsverfassungen,"  1889. The  descriptions  of  Switzerland  by   .foreigners  (H.   Dixon,  Tissot, Adams  and  Cunningham,  Winchester)  are  in   no  way  superior  to  the works  of   Swiss  authors.  The  best  account  of   Swiss  institutions  in   English is   found  in   A,   L.   Lowell's  "   Parties  and   Governments  in   Continental Europe."  vol.   ii.

## CHAPTER  X.

## SPAIN    AND     PORTUGAL,

THE  Iberian  peninsula,  in   the   eighteenth  century,  was  still divided  between  two  states  :   the   great   Kingdom  of   Spain   and   the little   Kingdom  of   Portugal.  Both  kingdoms  were  governed  by the   same  general  methods.  Each  had  an  absolute  King   who  let his   favourites  rule   without  restraint;  each  had   a   National  Church, which  owned  great  estates,  and  was  armed  with  the   Inquisition against  heretics.  In   both,   the   Church  had   a   censorship  over  all publications  and  the.   right   of   supervision  over  all   the   schools. Both  suffered  in   the   nineteenth  century  the   same  series  of   revolutions; both   were  at   length   organized  into  constitutional monarchies.  The  two  evolutions  are  parallel,  so  that  we  might consider  their  history  together.  It   will,   however,  be   more  clear if   we  examine  separately  first   Spain,   then   Portugal.

## SPAIN.

Spain  at   the   End  of   the   Napoleonic  Wars. - Spain   until  the French  invasion  was  an  absolutist  and  ecclesiastical  monarchy. The  former  little   kingdoms,  united  to   form  the   Spanish   monarchy, still   existed  in   name  (Castile,  Leon,   Galicia,  Asturia,  Navarre, Aragon,  Valencia,  and  the  kingdoms  of   Andalusia),  but  they were  nothing  more  than  provinces  ruled  directly  by   the   Castilian government.     The  old   assemblies  of   estates  (the   Cortes)  were  no longer    convoked.      The    descendants    of     the     aristocracy,    the Spanish  grandees,  had  been  thrust  aside.     There  remained  but one  political  power,  the   King.

The  King   had   centralized  all   authority  in   his   own  person,   but he   had   ceased  to   exercise  it   himself;  he   left   it   to   his   court.  It was  neither  the   old   Castilian  Council  nor   his   ministerial  cabinet that  governed  in   his   stead.  It   was  the   sovereign's  immediate circle,   his   wife,   his   confessor,  his   favourite,  or   his   wife's  favourite, that   governed  Spain   in   the   King's   name.  This  little  group  was called  the   camarilla  or   little   chamber.  Thus  during   the   reign   of Charles  IV.   the   real   sovereign  was  the   Queen's   favourite,  Godoy, created  Prince  of   Peace.

e   Church  alone  preserved  the   privileges  and   powers  of   former times.     It   retained   its    immense   domains   almost  without axes,   its   right   to   acquire   property  by   mortmain,  its   convents, nd   its   ecclesiastical  courts.     It   kept   up   the   court  of   the   Inquision  and  its   control  of   family   relations,  which  gave   it   authority ver  the   private   life   of   all   laymen.     Its   censorship  of   all   publicaons  made  it   supreme  over  the   nation's  intellectual  life. mer

There  were  thus  in   Spain   but   two  real   powers,  the   camarilla nd   the   clergy.      The   Spanish  submitted  to   this  twofold  despotism without  thought   of   saving   themselves  from  it,   at   least i without  the   power  to   do   so.      The   idea   and   the   means  of   reforming their    government   came  from   outside.      In    Spain,    as    in i Holland    and    Switzerland,    an     invasion    began     the     work    of regeneration.

The  French  invasion,  by   destroying  the   old   Spanish  system, I compelled  the   Spaniards  to   try   a   new  one;   it   was  the   decisive  event i in   their   history.  Napoleon,  by   setting   up   in   Madrid  a   French King,   placed   before  Spain   the   alternative  of   accepting  or   fighting him.  Those  who  rallied  to   the   French  King's   support,  the   afrancesados,  made  acquaintance  with  an  absolutist  and  military  government, but   one   directed  by   regular  officials  and   free   from  the power  of   the   clergy.  The  patriots,  rising   against  foreign  dominion, continued  to   declare  themselves  subjects   of   the   national King,   "   Ferdinand  the   Idolized  ";   but   as   their  King   was   imprisoned in   France,  they   had   to   fight   and   govern  themselves  without I him.  The  old   system  was  gone  with  the   Bourbon  King;   there Iwas   no   longer   a  camarilla  nor  an   Inquisition  nor  a  censorship. In   place   of   the   lost   government  the   patriots  organized another,  while  at  the   same  time  they   improvised  militia  and guerrillas.

The  movement  came  from  the  provinces  farthest  from  the ourt,   Asturia,  Aragon,  Catalonia,  Valencia,  and   Andalusia.  The nrovinces  began   once  more  to   take  a   part   in   political   life.  They ormed  at   first   provincial  juntas,   then  a   central  junta,   and   finally he   Cortes  of   1811.  These  improvised  governments  and  armies rought  into  public   life   energetic  men  who  were  previously  unoiown.  The  English  of   Wellington's  army  were  astonished it   the   opening  of   the   Cortes;  they   had  not  thought  it   posible   that   Spain   could  produce  so  many   brilliant  men.  Thus luring   the   invasion  a   body   of   politicians  and   military   officers  was reated  to   take   the   direction  of   affairs.  These  men,  educated  like *11   Spaniards,  had   no  political  knowledge;  but   as  reading  and

speech  were  now  unrestricted,  they   learned  the  existence  of things   that   had   been  hidden  from  them  before.  They   read  foreign books,   talked  with   French  and   English   officers,  studied  the French  Revolution  and  the  English  parliamentary  system. From  this  improvised  instruction  resulted  the  Constitution  of 1812,   which  was  the   first   form  given   in   Spain   to   modern  political ideas.

The  Constitution  of   1812  can  only   be   explained  by   the   special conditions  under  which  it   was  produced.  The  Cortes,  suddenly summoned  under  the   pressure  of   the   people   of   Cadiz,   had   nothing but   the   name  in   common  with  the   historical  Cortes  of grandees  and  prelates.  It   was  an  assembly  elected  by   a  sort  of universal  suffrage  in   three  degrees.  The  Castilian  provinces, which  were  occupied  by   the   French  armies,  did   not  send  deputies, The  majority  was  composed  of   deputies  from  the   maritime  provinces, Catalonia,  Galicia,   and   Cadiz,   which  were  more  democratic and  less  attached  to  absolutism  -than  the   rest  of   Spain.  The Cortes  thus  had  an  exceptionally  democratic  character.  It   resembled the   French   States-General  of   '89,   adopted   the   same   doctrines, and   like   them   deliberated  in   the   midst  of   clamour  and   applause from   the   public   in   the   galleries,  and   voted  the   same measures.

The  Assembly  was  divided  into  two  parties:  the   Serviles,  attached to   the   old   regime,   and   the   Liberals,  partisans  of   liberty.   It was  from  Spain   that   the   latter  term  came  into   popular   usage.   The Liberates,  who  were  in   majority,  declared  the   Cortes  sovereign and  indissoluble  (like   the   French  Constituante  in   '89)   and   voted to   abolish  the   old   system,  with  its   censorship  of   the   press,  seigniorial rights,   patrimonial  jurisdictions,  and   privileges  of   the nobility.

The  Constitution  of   1812  was  drawn  up   in   the   same  spirit. After  a   preamble  in   honour  of   the   "   old   fundamental  laws  of   this monarchy,"  the  Cortes  proclaimed  the  very  principle  of   the French  Revolution  :   "   Sovereignty  is   vested  essentially  in   the nation,   accordingly  it   is   to   the   nation  exclusively  that   the   right   of making  its   fundamental  laws  belongs."  The  end   of   the   sentence, "   and   of   accepting  the   form  of   government  which  suits  it   best,' was  rejected  by   87   votes  against   73.   The  government  was  organized on   the   model   of   the   French  Constitution  of   1791.   The executive  power  was  given   to   the   King   to   be   exercised  through his   ministers.  The  legislative  power  was  given   to   the   Cortes subject   to   royal   assent,  which  could  be   twice  withheld.  Ministers

could  not   be   deputies  and   had   access  to   the   Cortes  only   when sent  for.  The  Cortes  was  composed  of   a  single  assembly, elected  by   indirect  universal  suffrage.  The   deputies  were  elected for   two  years  only   and   were  -not  eligible  for   re-election.  The constitution  established  rules  for   the   organization  of   courts,  provincial administration,  taxation,  the   army,  and   public   education. It   proclaimed  the   principles  of   liberty   and   legal   equality.  This was  the   abolition  of   the   old   regime   root  and   branch.

On  one  point   the   Liberals  did   not   dare  break  with  tradition: they   did   not  announce  religious  liberty.  "   The  religion  of   the Spanish  nation  is   and   always   will   be   the   Apostolic  Church  of Rome,  the   only   true   Church;  the   nation  protects  it   by   wise  and just   laws   and   forbids  the   exercise  of   any   other  religion."  At least   the   Cortes  refused  to   restore  the   Inquisition  that   the   French had   abolished,  in   spite   of   the   demands  made  by   the   monks  who filled   the   galleries.

Thus  the   national  insurrection  of   1808  in   favour  of   the   absolute King   against   the   French  invaders  had   ended  by   creating   a Liberal  party  and  a  revolutionary  constitution,  like  those  of France. lute

Restoration  of   1814. - The   attempt  at   a   liberal  government  by the   Cortes  of   1811  was  suddenly  brought  to  an  end.     French intervention  had   caused  the   downfall  of   the   old   system,   English i intervention  brought  about  the   Restoration.

The  English  army  brought  back  the  absolute  King.  The King's   absence  in   itself  had   been  an  advantage  to   the   Liberals. After   his   return  the   balance  of   parties   shifted.  The   Serviles  presented to   Ferdinand  a  manifesto  against  the   Cortes  and  the   constitution, which   they   said   was  a   copy   of   the   constitution  proposed by   Napoleon  at   Bayonne;  they   asked  'him  to   convoke  the   Cortes according  to   the   ancient  custom.  As   the   King   passed   through the   country  the   monks  and   the   people   saluted  him   with  cries  of "   Long   live   the   absolute  King!   Down  with  the   traitors!  "   Ferdinand joined   the   absolutists;  he   signed   the   manifesto:  "My royal   will   is   not   only   not  to   swear  obedience  to   the   constitution and   not   to   accept   any   decree  from   the   Cortes,   but   to   declare  this constitution  and  these  decrees  void.  .  .   Whoever  should  maintain them   .   .   .   would  commit  an  outrage  against   the   prerogaives   of   my   sovereignty  and   the   welfare  of   the   nation.  .   .   I   delare   him   guilty   of   high   treason;  he   shall  suffer  the   penalty   of eath,   if   he   sustain  these  acts   by   tongue  or  pen."   Orders  were iven   to   close   the   hall   of   the   Cortes  and   to   seize   their   records.

19

Thirty-three  notables  of   the   Liberal  party   were  then   arrested. The  court  could  find  no  complaint  against  them;  they   were  left in   prison   for   a   year   and   a   half.  Finally,   in   December,  1815,   the King  himself,  sitting  in   judgment  without  having  read  the papers   in   their   cases,  condemned  some  of   them  to   eight   years   in   a convict  prison  (presidio),  others  to   imprisonment  in   a   convent, others  to  exile,   adding   that   at   the   expiration  of   their   sentence they   would  still   remain  at   the   King's   discretion.  The   members of   the   tribunal  of   Valencia  were   dismissed  from  their   judgeships for   having   had   a   medal  struck  with  the   inscription  "   The   King and   the   Constitution."

The  old   system  was  restored,  as   before  1808,   with   the   Castilian Council,  privileges,  Inquisition,  and   camarilla.  Every   evening,  it is   said,   the   King's   confessors  met  with   him,   drafted  decrees,  and ordered  arrests.

But  the   government  did   not   find   the   same  condition  of   affairs as   before  the   invasion,  ist,   Five  years  of   war   had   destroyed  the cities,   villages,  roads,   and   bridges,   decimated  and   impoverished the  population.  The  government  resources  were  diminished and  its   burdens  increased.  In   1816  the   expenses  were  estimated at  1,051,000,000  reals  (about  $13,000,000)  and  the  receipts  at little   more  than   half   that   amount.  The   financial  system  must  be reformed  to  cover  this  deficit.  2d,   The  American  colonies,  revolting against   the   French  usurpers,  had   remained  in   revolt against  the   legitimate  King;   armies  must  be   sent  to   subdue  them.

The  restoration  government  came  to   grief   in   these  two  enterprises. Ferdinand  at   first   let   his   minister  Garay   prepare  a budget  project  for   1817,   reducing  expenses  and  exacting  a  contribution from   the   clergy   and   high   officials.  He   even  supported Garay  against  the   clergy   and   the   court  until  September,  1817, then  suddenly  dismissed  him   before  any   reform  had   been  realized. In   the.   American  war   Ferdinand  had   counted  on  assistance  from Tsar  Alexander;  he   also  remained  for   a   number  of   years  under the   influence  of   the   Russian  ambassador,  who  used  his   power  to keep   Garay   in   office  and   to   secure  the   financial  reform.  Finally, in   February,  1818,   the   Russian  fleet   sent  to   aid   the   king   in   subduing his   colonies  arrived  at   Cadiz,  but   it   was  composed  of   old unseaworthy  ships;   the   King   had   to   send  them  back  to   Russia and   pay   the   expenses  of   their  return.  In   1820  the   army  which had   been   prepared  in   1816   against   Buenos  Ayres   was  still   waiting to   embark.

Revolution  of   1820. - The  war  against  Napoleon  had   roused  a

new  power   in   Spain,   the   officers  of   the   army.   These  'had   led   the nation  in   revolt,   and   they   remained  the   real   representatives  of   the nation  in   opposition  to   the   court.  They   were  acquainted  with one  another,  kept   in   communication  from  one  end   of   Spain   to   the other,   and   were  able   to   take   concerted  action  against   the   government.

Many  of   them,   connected  with  Masonic  lodges  organized  by the   French  and  English  during   the   invasion  time,   had   meetings with  the   liberal  Free  Masons.  It   was  the   officers,  aided  perhaps by   the   Free   Masons,  who  started  the   revolution  in   the   name  of the   Constitution  of   1812.  A   military  revolt  attempted  in   1815 had  failed.  But   the   army  was  not  satisfied.  Ferdinand  had   no love  for   the   army,  and   held   aloof  from  the   officers  wherever  he could;  the   soldiers  received  neither  clothes,  food,   nor  money.

In   1820   the   revolt  began   in   the   south,   in   the   army  encamped near  Cadiz,  waiting  since  1816  to   leave  for   America.  This  pronunciamiento  did   not  succeed.  Riego   crossed  the   whole  province of   Andalusia  with  1500  men  without  meeting  either  opposition or  support.  His  example  did,   however,  produce  a   decisive  uprising in   the  north.  Santiago,  the  old  ecclesiastical  city   of Galicia,  had   a   rival,   Corunna,  the   commercial  seaport,  where  a group  of   Liberals  was  still   in   existence.  These  made  arrangements with   the   officers  of   the   garrison   and   formed  an   insurrectional junta,   which   proclaimed  the   Constitution  of   1812.  The other  army  corps  refused  to   fight   or  else   declared  themselves  in sympathy  with  the   insurgents.  The  King   was  alarmed  and  announced his   readiness  to   accept  the   constitution.

Thus,  from  this   first   revolution  on,  provincial  juntas   and   military pronunciamientos  were  the   active  agencies  of   insurrection. First  created  to   oppose  the   foreign   invader,  these  two   instruments were  to  serve  henceforth  to  excite  political  revolutions.  They corresponded  to  the   two  elements  in   which  Spanish  political  life was  concentrated,  the   army  and  the   city   populations,  especially in   the   outlying  provinces,  Galicia,  Aragon,  Catalonia,  Valencia, Mercia,  and  Andalusia.  The  junta   furnished  the  impulse  to revolt,   the   army  supplied  the   power  and   controlled  the   movement.

The  generals,  who  in   old   Spain   were  of   no   importance,  became veritable  sovereigns  of   new  Spain.  The  country  entered  upon  a regime  of   pronunciamientos;  a   superior  officer  revolted  against   the government,  issuing  a  proclamation  to  explain  his   conduct  and appeal  to  the   discontented.  If   the   government  was  no   longer sufficiently  popular  to   be   defended  by   the   army,  the   insurgents

overturned  it   and   set   up   another.  This   appeal   to   force,   irregular though  it   might   be,   was,   in   a   country  not   yet   provided   with   political education,  the   sole   check  on   the   despotism  of   the   court.

From  the  time  of   this   first   revolution  parties   began   to   form and  questions  to   arise.  The  absolutist  party   was  shut   out   of   the government.  The  Liberal  party  organized  itself.  It   was  at   first directed  at   Madrid  by   a   political   club,   "   the   National  and   Constitutional Patriotic  Society   of   the   Lorencini  Cafe,"   which  held public  meetings  and  published  the   Aurora  de   Espaiia.  In   the great  cities  of   the   provinces  provisional  juntas   assumed  the   administration in   place   of   the   officials;  some  of   them  even  suppressed or   established  taxes.  The   Liberal  party   held   the   King   in its   power  and   governed  in   his   name,  invoking  the   constitution. The  text  of   the   constitution  was  posted   in   each  city,   and   carried in   processions  like  the   Eucharist  and  treated  with  the  same honours.  The  King   swore  solemnly  to   observe  the   constitution and  signed  a   decree  "   that   every   Spaniard  who  will   not  swear allegiance  to   the   constitution  or  who  does  it   with  protest  and reservation  is   unworthy  of   being   considered  a   Spaniard,  instantly loses  his   honour,  his   employment,  and  advantages  conferred  by the   state,   and   must   be   driven  out   of   the   monarchy."  The   bishops received  the   order  to   have  the   constitution  expounded  by   the parish  priests.  The  Cortes  was  then  elected  according  to   the constitution.  As   early   as   this   first   election  a   fact   appeared  which has   been  repeated  in   every  subsequent  Spanish  election  of   the century:  the   great  majority  of   those  elected  were  supporters  of the   government.

In   the   Cortes  of   1820   the   Liberals  divided  into   two  parties:   the Moderados  (moderates),  who  supported  the   ministry  and  wished to  avoid  conflict  with  the  King   and  clergy;  the  Exaltados (fanatics),  who  wished  to   provoke  conflict.  The  Moderados  had a   great   majority  in   the   Cortes,  while  the   E-valtados  were  supported almost   entirely   at   first   by   the   turbulent  cities  of   Andalusia and,   in   Madrid,  by   the   Fontana  de   Oro   club.  The   ministers  obtained from   the   Cortes   laws   limiting   the   liberty   of   the   press  and forbidding  political  societies.  But   the   Moderados  could  not   keep up   their   policy   of   conciliation  with  the   King   and   clergy.  The king   did   not   accept   the   constitution  sincerely,  and   it   could  not   be modified,  for   the   Cortes  of   1812,   in   order  to   prevent  the   return to   absolution,  had   established  a  process  for   revision  which  required several   years.   The   clergy   was  opposed   to   the   liberal  system in   advance.  The  finances  were  in   a   desperate  state,  with  a

deficit  increasing  yearly,   for   the   Cartes  had   lowered  the   unpopular land   tax,   and   the   taxes  came  in   slowly.  The   debt   was  estimated at   700,000,000  dollars.  The  ministry  decided  to  appropriate the   church  estates  by   a   law   suppressing  the   monasteries. The  clergy  became  henceforth  the   irreconcilable  enemy  of   the Moderados.

The  Moderados'  opponents,  absolutists  and  Exaltados,  worked together.  The  King's  confessor  secretly  excited  the   Exaltados against  the   ministry.  In   opposition  to   the   leaders  of   the   Moderados the   Free  Masons  formed  a  new  secret  society,  the   Communeros,  whose  members  had   to   swear  "   to   defend  the   rights   and liberties  of   the   human  race  and   especially  the   Spanish  people." The   members  were  chiefly   young  men  and   petty   military  officers.

The  Moderados  kept   themselves  in   power  with  difficulty,  surrounded by   Exaltado  insurrections  and   Servile  intrigues,  for   two years,  until  the   end   of   the   Cortes.  But   atwthe  renewal  for   1822, as   the   constitution  forbade  the   re-election  of   any   retiring   deputy, the   leaders  of   the   Moderados  found  themselves  shut  out,   and   the elections,  conducted  in   great   disorder,  gave   the   majority  to   the Exaltados.  The  King   again   formed  a   Moderado  ministry;  but   he conspired  against  his   ministry  himself.  Bands  of   absolutists, formed  by   smugglers  and  peasants,  led   by   monks,  made  their appearance  in   the   mountains  of   Catalonia.  The   royal   guard   revolted, dismissed  its   liberal  officers,   and   fought   against   the   army in   Madrid,  on   July   7,   1822.

A   new  ministry  composed  of   Exaltados  was  imposed  on  the king   by   the   majority  in   the   Cortes;  it   was  supported  by   the   Communeros  and   the   people   in   the   cities  of   Andalusia,  Valencia,  Aragon,  and  Catalonia.  But  when  the   absolutists  revolted  against the   Cortes  and   set   up   a   junta   in   Catalonia  which  called  the   nation to   arm  and   deliver  their  imprisoned  King   from  the   rebels,  they declared  null   all   the   government's  acts  since  1820   and   established a  regency.  These  insurgents  called  themselves  "   the   apostolic army   "   and   posed   as   the   defenders  of   religion   against   the   Free Mason  constitutionalists  (the   Blacks).

Restoration  of   1823. - The  absolutist  party  was  too   feeble  to reconquer  Spain.  The  restoration  was  brought  about  by   foreign intervention.  The  governments  of   the  four  great  continental monarchies  of   Europe  had  been  from  the   beginning  unfriendly to   the   revolution  of   1820;   but   they   dared  not  risk   an   invasion  of Spain.  The  French  government  finally  took  the  responsibility of   it.   The   French  army   invaded  Spain   this   time  to   restore  the

absolute  monarchy.  The  guerrillas  of   the   northern  frontiers,  who in   the  time  of   Napoleon  had  fought  against  the  French, now  formed  the  "   army  of   the   faith  "   and  marched  with  the invaders.

The  Spanish  government  had  neither  army  nor  money,  and made  no  attempt  to   stop   the   French.  The  Cortes  withdrew  first to   Seville,   then   to   Cadiz,   taking   with   them  the   unwilling  King. Ferdinand  said  he   was  sick;   they   replied   that  a   change  of   air would  cure  him.  On   the   departure  for   Cadiz,  he   refused  to   go; the   Cortes,  not  wishing  to   depose   the   King,   declared  him   insane and  established  a  regency.  The  absolutists,  entering  Madrid with  the   French  army,   formed  a   regency  which  restored  the   conditions of   1820.  All   over  the   country  bands  of   Royal   Volunteers were  organized,  and  the   bishop   of   Osma  even  founded  a  secret absolutist  society,  the   Destroying  Angel.  Notable  Liberals  were imprisoned  and  held  to   ransom  and  their  houses  pillaged.

The  government  of   the   Cortes  at   Cadiz  capitulated  at   the   end of   three   months.  After  the   fall   of   the   Trocadero,  Ferdinand  was sent  to   the   French  camp;  on   his   departure  he   promised  to   grant an  amnesty,  "   general,  full,   and   complete."  The   next  day   Ferdinand published  a   manifesto  annulling  all   the   acts  of   the   "   socalled  constitutional  government  "   and  ratifying  all   the   acts  ol the   absolutist  junta   and   regency.  He   then  condemned  to   the gallows  the   three  members  of   the   liberal  regency.

Ferdinand,  reinstated  as  an  absolute  monarch,  chose  his   confessor for   his   prime   minister.  He   dared  not  restore  the   Inquisition, but   he   tried  to&gt;   replace   it   with   " juntas   of   the   faith." This  meant  the   restoration  of   the   old   regime.  But   three  permanent results   followed  from  the   revolution:

1.   The  American  colonies  had  taken  advantage  of   the   con fusion  in   the   mother  country  to   effect  a   final   separation.
2.   The   debt   and   the   deficit  had   increased.
3.   The   absolutists  and   the   king   had   acquired  against   the   Liberals a   hatred  which  found  vent  in   years  of   persecution.     No   one who  had   filled  an  office  or  served  in   the   national  guard   during   the constitutional  regime' could  come  within  15   miles  of   the   royal   residence.    The   Liberal  leaders  were  arrested;  Riego*   was   hanged. Purge-commissions  were  established,  before  which  every  officeholder and   army   officer  must  appear  and   prove   that   during   the constitutional  period  he   had  committed  no  offence  against  the crown  or   the   Church.     To   encourage  men  to   become  king's   evidence the   government  promised  them  both  secrecy  and   a   pardon,

The  inquiry  was  extended  to   the   professors  and  students,  and finally   to   the   common  soldiers.

This  rigorous  system  was   beginning  to   relax  when,   in   1824,   the Liberal  refugees  in   Gibraltar  attempted  an   insurrection,  and   the persecution  was  resumed.  One  hundred  and  twelve  accused  persons were   hanged   or  shot.  Seven  Free  Masons  were  executed for   holding   a   meeting.  Every   man  was  prosecuted  in   whose  possession was   found   any   book   printed   in   Spain   between  1820   and 1823,   or  a   foreign   book.  In   the   universities  the   students  had to   swear  not  to   recognise  the   sovereignty  of   the   people   or   to join   a   secret  society.

Until  Ferdinand's  death,   in   1833,   the   government  was  controlled by   court  intrigues  or   the   influence  of   foreign   ambassadors.  The ministers  were  all   Absolutists,  but   they   did   not  all   have   the   same policy.  The  majority  (Ufalia  from  1823,   Zea   in   1825,   Burgos   in 1827)   wished  to   restore  peace   in   the   nation  by   granting  amnesty to   the   Liberals  and   putting   the   Royal   Volunteers  under  government control.  The   Apostolic  party   was   dissatisfied  and   deserted Ferdinand  for   his   brother  Carlos,  who   was   known  to   be   devoted to   the   clergy.  There  were  even  royalist  insurrections  in   Catalonia against   the   King,   in   1824,   1825,   and   particularly  in   1827. The  insurgents  demanded  the   dissolution  of   the   army,  the   abolition of   new  institutions  of   which  the   nation  knew  nothing, "   such   as  police   and   public   education,"  and   the   meeting  of   a national  council  to   settle  the   true  principles  of   religion.  But Carlos  refused  to   lift   a   hand  against   the   legitimate  sovereign.

The  result  was  to   alienate  Ferdinand  from  his   own  supporters. He   let   the   ministers  make  a   timid  attempt  at   financial  reform. But,   in   1831,   an  attack  by   the   Liberal  refugees  in   France  caused him  to   revert  to   the   system  of   terror.  Courts-martial  were  established. A   young  man  was  hanged  in   Madrid  for  crying "   Hurrah  for   liberty!   "   and   a   young  widow  at   Granada  for   embroidering a   flag   with   the   inscription  :   "   Law,   Liberty,  Equality."

War  of  the  Succession  (1830-33). - The  absolutist  system came  to  an  end  in   the   quarrel   regarding  the   law   of   succession. By   his   first   three  wives  Ferdinand  had   no  children,  so   that   his brother  Carlos  must  be   his   heir.  His   fourth  wife   was  a   Neapolitan princess,   Christina,  who   bore   him   two   daughters.  Since  the accession  of   the   Bourbons  at   the   beginning  of   the   eighteenth  century, the   succession  had   been,   in   Spain   as   in   France,  through   the male  line  exclusively;  Carlos  was  therefore  the   legitimate  heir. But   in   1831   Ferdinand,  wishing  to   secure  the   succession  to   his

## 296  SPAIN  AND  PORTUGAL.

own  daughter,  availed  himself  of   a   decree  restoring  the   old   order of   female  succession,  which  had  been  prepared  in   1789   but   had never  been  promulgated;  he   now  promulgated  it   without  notifying either   his   brother  or   the   Council  of   State.

From  this   time,   April   3,   1830,   until   Ferdinand's  death,   Spain's whole  policy   depended  on  the   struggle  between  two   influences, that   of   the   Queen   and   that   of   the   Apostolic  party.   The   Queen ruled  at   first,   supported  the   ministers  in   office,  had   Louis Philippe  recognised,  and,   when  a   daughter  was  born  to   her, sought  to  gain   support  among  the   ancient  aristocracy  so   long excluded  from  the   court,   by   appointing  chamberlains  and   maids of   honour.  The  attempt  of   the   Liberals  in   1831   threw  the   King on   the   side   of   the   Apostolic   party   for   eighteen   months  ; in   September, 1832,   when   he   was   thought   to   be   dying,   the   Queen   in her   isolation  was  obliged   to   consent  to   a   measure  annulling  the decree  of   1831   restoring  female  succession.  But   Ferdinand  recovered, dismissed  his   ministers,   and   placed   the   government  in the   Queen's  hands.  A   royal   act  annulled  the   measure  obtained during  the   King's   illness.  In   June,   1833,   the   Castilian  Cortes were  convoked  in   the   old   form,  - the   grandees   and   the   proctors  of 38   cities,  - and   were  made  to  swear  to  recognise  the  King's daughter  Isabella  as   Queen.  But  the   new  order  of   succession was  still   much  debated.  The   King   had   his   brother  asked  to   take the   oath.  Carlos  replied   by   begging  him  to   communicate  his protest  to   the   sovereigns  :   "   I   am   firmly   convinced  of   my   legitimate right   to   the   throne   of   Spain   in   case   I   should  survive  Your Majesty  and   you  should  leave  no  son;   I   declare  that   neither  my conscience  nor  my   honour  will   permit   me  to   swear  to   recognise any   other  claims."

Carlos  was  supported  by   all   the   monks,  the   greater  part   of   the clergy,  many  army  officers,  all   the   Royal   Volunteers  (officially estimated  at   10,000  foot-soldiers  and  4000  cavalry,  armed  and uniformed),  all   the  cities  of   Castile,  and  all   the  Pyrenean provinces.  The  Queen's  party   included  only   the   office-holders, grandees,  and   a   part   of   the   army;   but   it   had   the   decided  advantage of   being   in   possession  of   the   government  at   the   time  of   the King's  sudden  death,  September  29,   1833.  The  Queen   was  appointed regent   until   the   majority   of   her   daughter,  Queen   Isabella.

The  minister  who  governed  in   Christina's  name,  Zea  Bermudez,  aspired  to   maintain  the  absolutist  system  and  govern in   opposition  to   both  the   Carlists  and  the   Liberals.  In   1832

I

he   had   declared  the   Queen   "   irreconcilably  opposed  to   any   religious or   political   innovation";  and   after  Isabella's  accession, he   had   her   say:   "   I   will   maintain  the   forms  and   fundamental  laws of   the   monarchy  without  admitting  dangerous  innovations." But   Christina  finally   realized  that   to   resist  the   Carlists  she   needed the   help   of   all   opponents  of   the   old   regime,   and   she   decided  to seek   the   support  of   the   Liberals.  She   granted   amnesty  for   political offences,  and   ordered  the   Royal   Volunteers  to   disarm;  the Liberals  then   gave   her   open  support.  Spain   was  then  arrayed  in two  parties:  Carlists  and   Christinas.  The  European  states  also took  sides:  the   constitutional  governments,  England  and   France, with  Christina,  the   absolute  monarchies  with  Carlos.

The   Statute  of   1834  and   the   Constitution  of   1837. - The   government first   attempted  administrative  reforms;  Spain   was divided  into   49   provinces,  each  with  a  civil  governor,  after  the model  of   the   French  departments.  These  still  remain  the   divisions of   Spain,   and   have  definitely  replaced  the   former  historic provinces.  Then,  in   order  to   be   able  to   make  war  on  the   Carlists,   the   queen  called  on   the   Liberals  to   take   the   government.

The  ministry,  under  a   Liberal  martyr,  Martinez  de   la   Rosa, decided  to   grant  a   new  constitution.  But   the   framers  of   it   affected to   avoid  the   forms  of   1812.  The  Queen   Regent  promulgated a   Royal  Statute  in   her   daughter's  name,  announcing  that she   had   "   resolved  to   convoke  the   general  Cortes  of   the   kingdom." These   Cortes  should  hold  public   sessions  and  should have  the   power  to   vote  taxes  and   laws.  But   the   ministers  were not  to   be   responsible  to   the   Cortes  ;   the   government  reserved  the right   to   convoke  and   dissolve  the   Cortes,   to   appoint   its   presiding officers,  and  to   propose  bills  for   enactment.  The  Cortes  was divided  into   two  estates  (estamcntos).  That  of   the   Proceres  was composed  of   prelates,  hereditary  grandees  enjoying  an   income of   $10,000  and  life-members  appointed  by   the  crown  with an  income  qualification  of   $3000.  The  Procuradores,  who formed  the   second  estate,  were  deputies  elected  for   three  years by   indirect  election - the   primary  voters  being   property  owners. Deputies-elect  must  have  an   income  of   $600,   and   were  to   receive no  salary. gated

Under  old  Spanish  names  this  was  almost  the   same  as  the French  Charter  under  Louis  XVIII.  Spain  became,  by   concession from   the   crown,  a   constitutional  monarchy.  It   had   not yet,   however,  a   true  representative  system  ; the   ministry  was  still independent  of   the   nation's  representatives.  Even  if   it   should

become  responsible  to   the   Ghamber,  it   would  be   so  only   in   name. If   the   ministers  found  themselves  in   conflict  with   the   Cortes,   they had  only   to   dissolve  it   in   order  to   be   sure  of   a   victory,   for   the government  in   Spain   has   an   irresistible  influence  over  the   electors. There   have   been   many  elections  since  1835,   and   they   have always  given   the   government  a   majority.  The  elective  chamber was  in   1844,   and   is   still,   hardly   more  than   an  ornament.  And   yet the   Statute  of   1834   marks  a   new  era   in   the   political   life   of   Spain; henceforth  the   ministers,  whether  generals  or  politicians,  exercise the   power,  and   the   ministry  has   taken  the   place   of   the camarilla.

With  the   opening  of   the   Cortes  in   1834   began   a  greatly   agitated parliamentary  life.  The   Liberals  who  returned  from  exile brought  with  them  the   doctrines  and  formulas  of   liberal  countries- France  and   England.  A   new  generation  of   orators  appeared with   the   Spanish   gift   of   eloquence.  But   their  debates in   the   Cortes  have  more  literary  than  political  interest.  The possession  of   power  rested  mainly  on  military  revolts,  court  intrigues, and   the   influence  of   the   foreign   governments  that   formed the   Quadruple  Alliance.  All   these  counterbalancing  forces  produced a  very  unstable  equilibrium.  The  ministries  were  short; in   twenty-five  years,  1833   to   1858,   there  were  47   presidents  of   the council,  61   ministers  of   the   interior,  78   of   finance,  and   96   of   war. As   the   deputies  received  no  salary,   politicians  had   no  alternative but   to   become  ministers  or  office-holders.  So   the   contention  for possession  of   the   ministry  has   been  fierce.  In   this   impoverished country,  where  opportunities  to  make  a   living   are  scant,  there have  always  been  many  more  candidates  than  offices  to   be   filled. This  competition  between  candidates  for   office  is   the   ruling   force and  explains  the   parliamentary  disturbances  in   Spain.  Personal motives  are,   however,  disguised  under  the   name  of   efforts  for   the success  of   a   party.

The  Liberals,  as  after  1820,   divided  into   two  parties:   Moderates and  Progressists.  The  latter  name  took  the   place   of   Exaltados.

The  Moderates  accepted  the   Royal   Statute,  that   is   to   say,   the sovereign's  control  over  the   Chambers.  They   wished  to   keep the   upper   house  exclusively  for   hereditary  and   life   members,  to have  high   voting   qualifications,  and  a  censorship  of   the   press. They   were  willing   to   leave  the   local   administrations - the   municipalities and   the   provincial  deputations - subject   to   the   central government.  They  wished  to  avoid  radical  reforms,  which  the clergy   and   great   landowners  disapproved,  and   confine  themselves

to   administrative  and   financial  reforms.  They   were  supported by   the   French  government.  Their  party  was  an  aristocratic  one, formed  by   officials  and   such  of   the   great   landowners  as  were  not Carlists;  its   power   lay   in   the   central  and   northern  provinces.

The  Progressists  demanded  the  Constitution  of   1812,  which made  the   Cortes  superior  to   the   government.  They   wanted  more democratic  elections,  liberty   of   the   press  and   of   creed,   and   elective local   authorities  in   the   provinces  an'd   cities.  They   declared themselves  opposed  to   the   clergy   and   aristocracy.  They   looked to   the   English   government  for   support.  They   were  a   democratic and  provincial  party,  particularly  numerous  in   Andalusia  and in   the   cities  of   ancient  Aragon  - Barcelona,  Saragossa,  and Valencia.

The  Moderates,  called  to   the   ministry  by   the   Queen   Regent, had   to   direct  the   war  against   the   Carlists.  Despairing  of   bringing it   to   an   end,   they   twice   asked  help   from   France,  and   were  twice refused.  The  Progressists,  irritated  by   the   Carlist  victories,  had risen  against  the   monks;  at   Saragossa  the   people  sacked  the monasteries  and  massacred  a  number  of   monks;  at   Barcelona they   burned  six   monasteries,  shot  32   monks,  and   beat  others  to death;  at   Madrid  four  monasteries  were  burned.  Insurrectional juntas   proclaimed  the   Constitution  of   1812,   attacked  officials,  and levied  taxes.  In   September,  1835,   tne   Queen,  on  the   advice  of the   English  ambassador,  called  to   the   ministry  a   Jewish   banker, Mendizabal,  who  was  friendly  to   the   Progressists  and   connected in   business  affairs  with   London.  The   new  minister  gave  promise of   relieving   Spain's   financial  embarrassment.

The  budget   had   never  ceased  to   show  a   deficit;  since  1823-   over $150,000,000  had  been  borrowed.  Mendizabal  was  counting on   the   monastic  possessions  to   pay   off   the   debt;   they   were valued  at  $900,000,000.  There  were  90,000  monks.  In 1836,   by   a   series  of   decrees,  he   suppressed  all   the   monasteries, congregations,  and  other  religious  houses  for   men,  also  some  of the   convents  for   women.  He   declared  their  real  and  personal property  appropriated  to   paying   off   the   national  debt.  The   government gained   almost  nothing   from  this   transaction:  government paper,   instead  of   going   up,   went   down  from   16   to   12.

The  Queen  took  a   Moderate  ministry  again   in   1836,   and   new elections  gave   it   a   majority  in   the   Cortes.  But   the   Progressists revolted  in   Andalusia,  Aragon,  Catalonia,  and   Madrid.  Queen Christina  was  with  Munoz,  her  favourite,  at   her  country-seat, Granja  Castle.  One  evening,  August  12,  1836,   while  the   supe-

rior   officers  were  at   the   theatre,  the   lower  officers  led   the   garrison in   revolt,   invaded  the   castle,  and   forced  the   Queen   to promulgate  the   Constitution  of   1812,   then  to   summon  a   Progressist ministry.   The   Progressists  assumed  power,  and   decided to   revise  the   Constitution  of   1812  without  conforming  to   the   prescribed forms   of   revision,   and   had   the   Cortes  vote  the   constitution of   June,   1837.   This  was  a   compromise  between  the   Constitution of   1812  and   the   Statute  of   1834.   It   gave   to   the   Cortes   the initiative  in   making  laws,   to   the   King   the   right   to   refuse  his assent  and   to   dissolve  the   Cortes.  The   Coftes  was  to   consist  of two   houses:  the   Senate,  composed  of   members  appointed  for   life by   the   crown  from  a   list   prepared   by   the   electors;  the   Congress, composed  of   deputies  elected  by   direct  vote  for   3   years.   They were  made  re-eligible,  contrary  to   the   system  of   1812.  The   ministers might   be   taken   from   among  the   members  of   the   Cortes. The  article  on  religion   was  purposely  voted  in   very  vague   form: "   The   nation  promises  to   maintain  the   creed  and   ministers  of   the Catholic  religion  which  the   Spaniards  profess."  They   avoided deciding  between  the   principle  of   religious  intolerance  admitted in   1812  and   the   principle  of   toleration  demanded  by   the   Progressists. Local   and   provincial   administration  was  to   be   left   to elective  authorities. son

This  system  was  not  allowed  time  to   work  itself  out   in   practice. But   there   were   henceforth  in   Spain   two  constitutions,  corresponding to   the   two  parties:   the   Statute  of   1834   for   the   Moderates, the   Constitution  of   1837   for   the   Progressists.

The  Carlist  War  (1834-39). - During  all   these  political  struggles between  the   two   factions  of   the   Liberal  party   civil   war  was still   going   on   between  the   government  armies,  the   Christinas, and  the  absolutist  insurgents,  the   Carlists.  Don  Carlos  had taken  no  steps  to   organize  his   supporters.  In   all   the   provinces except   Andalusia,  armed  bands  proclaimed  Charles  V.,   but   were soon  dispersed  (1834).  Carlos  was  in   Portugal,  with  the   absolutist pretender,   Miguel,   hoping   to   return  -to   Spain   with   a   Portuguese army.   It   was,   however,  a   Spanish  army  that  invaded Portugal  and   forced  the   two  pretenders  to   set  sail   for   England. guese

The  Carlists'  power  lay   in   the   fact   that   their  party   was  not composed  entirely  of   absolutists  and  clergy:  it   included  also the   mountaineers  of   Navarre  and  the  Basque  country.  The three  Basque  provinces  were  not  incorporated  in   the   Spanish monarchy;  the   king   was  only   lord   there,   with  neither  army  nor officials.  The   Basques  governed  themselves,  each  province  hav-

ing   its   senoria,   each   village   its   assembly  of   the   heads  of   families. They  paid   no  royal   taxes,  rendered  no  military  service.  The country  was  outside  the   line  of   Spanish  customs  duties,  which gave   the   inhabitants  the   double  advantage  of   trading   freely   with France  on  one  side  and   of   plying   the   trade  of   smuggling  goods into   Spain   on   the   other  side.  This  is   the   combination  of   liberties known  as   the   fueros.  Navarre  enjoyed  similar  privileges. The  Basque  country  did   not  suffer  the   poverty  of   Spain.  It   had none  of   the   beggars  and   ruined  villages   (despoblados)  seen  in   the other  provinces.  The  valleys  were  well  cultivated  and   the   houses well   kept   up.   There  were  many  schools  and   few   convents.  The society  was  democratic,  composed  of   peasant  landowners,  and very   Catholic,  rendering  faithful  obedience  to   native  priests.

To   these  peoples  the   old   regime   signified  the   maintenance  of the   fueros.  Liberal  victory   meant  centralization,  uniform  law's, the   prospect  of   descending  to   a   level  with   Spain.   By   taking   up arms  for   the   absolute  king   the   mountaineers  thus  defended  their privileged  position ;   also   their  religion,  which  they   believed  to   be threatened  by   the   Liberals.

Zumalacarregui,  a   Basque,  and  a  colonel  in   the   regular   army, organized  the   first   Carlist  army   in   Navarre.  The  insurgents  of the   Basque  provinces  then  put   themselves  under  'his   command. Each  province  formed  its   battalions;  the   men,  clothed  in   the native  costume  of   wool,   with  Tarn  o'   Shanter  caps,   linen  shoes  on their   feet,   carrying   only   a   woollen  blanket  and   a   linen  sack,   could pass  through  the  most  difficult  mountain  paths;  they   made marches  of   16   to   18   hours.  The   Carlist  methods  were  the   same as   those  of   the   guerillas;  to   avoid  battles,  and   take  the   enemy by   surprise,  retreating  before  superior  forces  over  the   mountain to   another  valley.  They   were  sure  of   help   from  the   inhabitants everywhere.  The  Christinos  were  heavily  encumbered  and  could use  only   the   valley   roads,   among  a   hostile  population  which  refused to   guide   them  and  reported  their  movements  to   the   Carlists.  The  army,   formed  partially  of   new  recruits,  ill-equipped and   often   left   unpaid   by   the   government,  exhausted  itself  in   fruitless manoeuvres.

This   war  of   all   Spain   against   the   mountaineers  lasted  over   five years.  It   consisted  of   numberless,  confused,  and  insignificant operations,  conducted  separately  in   two  regions :   in   the   west,   Navarre and   the   Basque   provinces;  in   the   east,   Catalonia  and   Aragon.  In   all   these  countries  the  cities,  guarded  by   national guards  composed  of   Liberals,  remained  faithful  to   the   govern-

ment  and  resisted  the   attacks  of   the   Carlists.  Don  Carlos  returned from   England   in   July,   1834,   and   established  his   court  and government  in   Navarre.

The  war  very  soon  became  fierce.  The  Carlists  murdered their   prisoners:  they   could  not  guard   or   feed   them.  The   government generals   had   the   insurgent  officers  and  soldiers  shot. Notables  of   the   opposing  party   were  shot   on   both   sides,   and   both began   to   take   hostages  and   execute  them.  In   Catalonia,  where the   Carlist  general  Cabrera  had  had  an  alcade  shot,   General Mina,  one  of   the   heroes  of   the   Liberal  party,   had  Cabrera's mother,  an   inoffensive  old   lady,   arrested  and   shot,   "   to   restrain," he   said,   "   by   a   just   system  of   reprisals   the   excesses  of   the   bloodthirsty Cabrera."

Both  parties  received  outside  aid.  The  constitutional  governments lent   the   Spanish   government  an   English  legion   and   a French  legion ;   the   absolutist  governments  and   the   French  legitimists sent   Carlos   money,  arms,  and   volunteers.

The  Carlists  seemed  many  times  to   be   on  the   point   of   victory; but   Don  Carlos  either  could  not  or  would  not  profit   by   these occasions.  He  was  neither  a  general  nor  a  statesman;  he counted  on  miraculous  help   from  the   Mother  of   Grief,  - whom  he appointed  head  of   the   royal   armies  in   1836,  - and   let   himself  be directed  by   his   camarilla  of   confessors  and  favourites,  who thwarted  the   operations  of   his   generals.  Three  times  he   failed  to conquer:

1.   In   1835,   during   the   struggles  between  the   Moderates  and Progressists,  Zumalacarrequi  was  preparing  to   march  on   Madrid with   28,000  men;  the   camarilla  sent  him  to   besiege   Bilbao,  and he   was   killed.

2.   In   1836,   after   the   Granja   pronunciamiento,  the   Moderates seemed  ready,  out  of   hatred  to   the   Progressists,  to   join   Don Carlos;  but,   instead  of   promising  an  amnesty,  he   ordered  public prayers  for   the   extermination  of   unbelievers.

3.   In   1837   Don   Carlos  finally   decided  to   march  on   Castile,   but he   could   take   only   12,000   foot   soldiers  and   1200  cavalry,  unprovided with   food   or   money,  and   let   himself  be   turned  aside   toward Valencia.    At   the   end   of   four   months  he   came  in   sight   of   Madrid, but,   not   daring   to   attack  it,   retired  to   the   mountains  without  a battle.

Don   Carlos'  supporters  divided  at   length   into   two  parties:  on the   one   hand,   the   Apostolicals,  the   king's   ministers  and  confessors; and,   on   the   other,   the   Marotists,  partisans  of   General-in-

chief   Maroto, - the   army  and   the   mountaineers.  Maroto  finally arrested  and  shot  four  generals  of   the   Apostolic  party;   Don Carlos  declared  him  a   traitor.  Maroto  at   the   head  of   his   army forced  Don  Carlos  to   dismiss  his   councillors  and   declare  his   approval of   the   steps   taken  by   his   general.

The  Basques  were  weary  of   war.  A   party   had   been  formed  in i837&gt;   with   the   i   otto   Pas   y fueros,   peace  and   the   fueros.  It   was ready   to   accept   Queen   Isabella  on  condition  that  the   country should  retain  its   privileges.  The  Liberal  government  authorized its   general,  Espartero,  to   make  terms  with  the   insurgents  on this  basis.  The  negotiations,  interrupted  but  resumed  again, brought  about  the  Convention  of   Vergara,  August  31,  1839. The  Carlist  army  was  disarmed;  each  man  was  given   the   choice of   retiring   or  passing   into   the   service  of   the   government  with   his grade   and   his   decorations.  Espartero  was  to   advise  the   government to   promise  to   recommend  to   the   Cortes  the   guarantee  of   the fueros.  Don  Carlos  fled  to   France  with  8000  men.  Cabrera continued  the   war   in   Catalonia  until  July,   1840.

The  Military  Dictatorship  of   Espartero  and   of   Narvaez  (184051).  - As   soon  as   the   Carlist  war  was  over,  the   generals  became the   political   leaders  of   Spain ; they   bore  the   name  of   a   party,   but in   reality   they   struggled  against   one  another  for   the   mastery  of the   power.

Espartero,  created  Duke  of   Vittoria,  famed  for   having   put   an end  to   the   Carlist  war,  was  the   first   military   dictator.  He   disliked Queen   Christina,  who   favoured  the   Moderates,  and  so   he sided  with  the   Progressists.  The  occasion  of   his   revolt  was  the municipal  law  of   1840,   passed   by   the   Moderates,  who  were  then in   power;   it   took   from   the   municipalities  the   right   of   electing   the alcaldes,  and   gave   the   power  of   appointment  to   the   government, contrary  to   the   Constitution  of   1837.   The  Progressists  revolted in   Barcelona,  then   in   Madrid  ; Espartero  supported  them.  Christina, deserted  by   the   army,   fled   to   France  (1840).  Espartero  got himself  named  as  regent.  For  three  years   he   governed  Spain. He  defeated  the   Moderate  generals,  who  revolted  at   Pampeluna in   1840.  He   bombarded  Barcelona,  where  a   Republican  party had   formed,  and,   with  the   aid   of   the   officers,  had   proclaimed  a   republic. After   having   dissolved  the   Cortes  twice  in   five   months, he   was   defeated  by   a   coalition  of   all   the   parties,   Moderates,  Progressists, and   Republicans,  and   was   forced  to   leave  Spain. Queen  Isabella  was  declared  of   age   in   1843.

The  coalition  was  short-lived.    The   Moderates,  backed  by   the

generals,  overturned  the  Progressist  ministry  and  recalled Queen  Christina,  who  married  Murioz  and   created  him   Duke  of Rianzares.  One  of   the   Moderate  generals,  Narvaez,  assumed control  of   the   government  in   May,   1844,   and   governed,  with   a few  interruptions,  until  1851.   The  Progressist  constitution  of 1837   was  set  aside  to   make  room  for   the   Constitution  of   1845, almost  a   reproduction  of   the   Statute  of   1834.   The   crown,  the ministry,  and   a   Council  of   State  exercised  all   the   real   power,  and appointed  the  municipal  and  provincial  authorities.  It   was  a centralized  system  copied  from  France.  Newspapers  were closely   watched,  and   no  article  could  be   printed   without  previous approval  of   the   government.

As   a   means  of   conciliation  the   clergy   received  'back  the   possessions that   had   not   been   sold.  Under  the   Moderates'  rule  the question  of   the   Spanish   marriages,  which  had   for   so   long   filled   the French  and  English  newspapers,  was  at   length  brought  to  an end.  These  marriages - that  of   Queen  Isabella  with  her   cousin Francis,  Duke  of   Cadiz,  and  that  of   Luisa,  the   Queen's  sister, with  the   Due  de   Montpensier,  son  of   Louis  Philippe - agitated Europe  and  especially  England,  because  they   were  expected  to make  French  influence  supreme  in   Madrid:  they   were  also   said   to be   a   breach  of   engagements  made  between  the   French  and   English governments.  But   their  importance  was  overrated.  They did   not  change   political   conditions  in   Spain.   Francis,  the   Prince Consort,  weak  in   body   and   mind,   took   no  part   in   the   government. The  queen  mother,  Christina,  remained  the   head  of   the   court.

Under  the  system  of   dictatorship,  the   government,  whether Progressist  or   Moderate,  never  followed  the  procedure  prescribed by   the   constitutions.  It   settled  by   a  simple  decree matters  which  should  have  been  voted  under  form  of   a   law.  It suspended  by   decree  the   constitutional  guarantees  of   personal liberty   or  established  martial  law;   it   was  thus  able  to   arrest  its opponents,  suspend  their  publications,  and  forbid  public  meetings. As   for   the   taxes,   which  by   all   the   constitutions  should  pass the   Cortes  before  being   levied,   they   were  not  once  regularly  imposed from   1834   to   1850;   the   ministry   merely   obtained  a   previous authorization  from  the   Cortes  to   draw  up   a   budget  and  levy necessary  taxes.

The   Moderates,  once  established  in   power,  ·although  they   had still   to-   put   down   the   Republican  insurrections  of   1848,   were chiefly   occupied  with  financial  regulations.  They   organized  a uniform  system  of   direct  taxes  on  consumption  and  on  callings.

The  debt  was  consolidated  and  fixed  officially  at   $600,000,000, and   the   budget   was  almost  balanced.  The  customs  tariff  of   1849 suppressed  many  prohibitions,  lowered  and  regulated  the   duties on   foreign   articles.

The   Concordat  of   1851  and   the   Breaking  up   of   Parties. - When Isabella  was  established  on   the   throne,  the   absolutists  abandoned the   Carlists  little   by   little   and   rallied  to   the   support  of   the   government. The   Moderate  party,   transformed  by   these  new  recruits, became  more  and  more  like  the  old  absolutist  party.  The camarilla  formed  again   about  Christina,  then  about  Isabella,  and governed  sometimes  through  the   ministers,  sometimes  in   opposition to   them.  In   January,  1851,   Christina  got   rid   of   Narvaez  and called  her   personal  supporters  to   the   ministry.

The  Moderate  party   broke  up   between  1851   and  1854;   the Liberals  detached  themselves  from  it.   The  Moderates,  left   in power  with  Christina's  support,  adopted  an  absolutist  policy   to satisfy   the   aristocracy  and   the   clergy,   who   were  now  reconciled with  the   crown;  they   wished  to   re-enforce  the   Church's  authority in   the   monarchy.  This  was  the  time  of   general  reaction  in Europe  following  the   excitements  of   1848.*

Church  affairs  were  the   first   to   be   settled.  The   government, independently  of   the   Cortes,  signed   with  the   Pope   the   Concordat of   March,  1851,   whereby  all   Church  affairs  were  to   be   regulated according  to   canonical  form.  "   Catholicism  is   the   national  religion, all   others  are   forbidden.  Instruction  in   the   public   schools must  be   in   harmony  with  religion."  The  bishops  received  power to   oversee  the   purity   of   the   faith,   and   the   religious   education  of children.  "   The   government  will   lend  its   support  to   the   bishops when  they   ask   it   to   oppose  any   enterprise  of   a   nature  to   pervert the   minds  of   believers  and   corrupt  their  morals;  also   to   prevent the  publication,  circulation,  and  introduction  of   evil  books." Thus  the   government  gave   the   clergy   control  of   education  and   a censorship  of   books,  and   put   itself   at   the   service  of   the   ecclesiastical authority.  In   return  the   Pope   consented  to   the   abolition  of Church  jurisdiction  and   recognised  the   sale   of   Church  property; but   the   government  promised  to  respect  the   property  not  sold and   authorized  the   Church  to   acquire   new   lands.

In   political   matters,  the   ministers,  in   December,  1852,   prepared a   series   of   projects   for   the   reform  of   the   constitution;  they   wished

*This  movement  is   marked  in   Spain  by   Balmes'  philosophy  and  the writings  of   Donoso  Cortes,  for   which  the   Catholic  party   made  a   European reputation. 2O

20

to   make  the   constitution  conform  with  practice  by   officially recognising  the   right   of   the   government  to   govern  without  the Cortes.  The  budget  was  to   be   permanent;  the   laws   were  to   be made  by   the   Crown  and   the   Council  of   State;   relations  with   the Church  were  to   be   settled  by   the   Crown  and   the   Pope.  The Cortes  were  to   lose   the   publicity  of   their   meetings,  the   Senate  to become  hereditary,  the   number  of   deputies  to   be   reduced  from 349   to   171   and   their   property  qualification  raised.  A   decree  had created  a   special   system  against   the   press;  crimes  against   public order  and   society   were   judged   by   a   jury   composed  of   the   heaviest taxpayers;  in   the   provinces  the   governor,  or  prefect,  could  impose a   fine   by   administrative  process.  The  government  might suspend  or  suppress  "   any  publication  showing  tendencies  dan- gerous to   the   fundamental  principles  of   society." The  Liberal  Union  and  the   Revolution  of   1854. - This  system ended  in   a   revolution.  The   Moderates,  left   out  of   the   ministry, formed  a   coalition  with  the   Progressists,  with  Narvaez  at   their head.  The  generals  led   the   opposition.  In   the   Senate  it   was shown  by   allusions  to   Christina's  husband,  who  was  accused  of securing  concessions  for   railroads.  The  government  replied  by suspending  the   Cortes.  The  generals  set  on   foot  military  revolts; the   ministry  put   down  two  of   them,   but   was   defeated  by   the third.  A   Moderate  general,  O'Donnell,  together  with  the director-general  of   the   cavalry,  organized  it   at   Madrid;  Espartero,   once  more  leader  of   the   Progressists,  joined   them  in   Aragon.  This  time  the   people   in   Madrid  built  barricades  and   fought for   three  days,   sacking   the   ministers'  houses  and   murdering  the police   agents.  Christina  was  obliged  to   flee,   leaving   Isabella  at the   mercy  of   the   insurgents.  The   revolution  of   July,   1854,   was  a victory   for   the   generals   and   the   democrats  of   the   large   cities  over the   court  and   clergy.  The  army  gained   by   it:   all   the   officers were  advanced  a   grade.

O'Donnell  and  Espartero,  having   secured  control  of   the   power, governed  together  from  1854   to  1856.   Espartero,  president  of the   council,  was  supported  by   the   Progressists;  O'Donnell,  minister of   war,   had   created  a   new  party,  the   Liberal  Union,   formed of   seceders  from  the   old   parties,   the   Desengannados  or   Disillusioned Ones,   favouring  a   liberal  constitutional  monarchy,  a happy   mean  between  the   absolutism  of   the   former  Moderates  and the   anarchy  of   the   Progressists.

In   this   coalition  government  the   Progressists  had   at   first   the chief  influence.  They   armed  the   militia  (national  guard)   and

LIBERAL    UNION  AND    THE  REVOLUTION  OF  1854.      3°7

convoked  a   Cortes  to   draw  up   a   constitution;  the   majority  in   the assembly  was  Progressist.  The  Progressist  officials  dismissed in   1843   were  reinstated,  and   the   years   that   had   elapsed   since   their dismissal  were  to  count  as  years  of   service.  The  Council  of State  was  suppressed,  taxes  on  articles  of   food   abolished,  and   the administrative  law  of   1821  was  re-enacted.  The  Constitution  of 1855   was  voted,  making  the   Senate  elective.  But  before  the constitution  was  promulgated  the   Progressists  lost   control  of   the government.

A   republican  party   had   been  formed,  chiefly   in   the   northwestern provinces,  demanding  universal  suffrage,  liberty   of   holding public   meetings  and  the   abolition  of   military  conscription.  At Barcelona  the  workingmen,  organized  in   secret  societies,  revolted, massacred  a   number  of   employers,  and   took   possession  of the   city.   The  Carlists  revolted  for   the   defence  "   of   religion." The  Progressists,  who  were  in   power,   in   order  to   meet  these  uprisings, suspended   the   guarantees  of   liberty,   an  action  which brought  them  into  conflict  with  the   democrats. ern

Queen  Isabella  broke  with  the  Progressists  when  they   expressed a   desire  to   meddle  with  Church  property.  The  law  of disamortization  passed   by   the   Cortes  ordered  the   sale   of   all   mortmain property,  that   of   the   state,   of   the   communes,  of   charitable institutions,  and   of   the   clergy.   The   government  was  to   reimburse the   clergy   by   giving   them  3   per   cent,   bonds.  Isabella  refused  to sanction  this   law   and   threatened  to   abdicate;  she   would  show, she   said,   "   that   a   Queen   could  make  sacrifices  for   her   faith."

In   the   ministry,  O'Donnell  was  already  in   open  conflict  with the   Progressists  ; the   Queen   took  his   part   and   asked  him   to   form a  ministry.  The  Progressist  deputies  protested.  The  Madrid militia  revolted.  O'Donnell  won  the   victory.  After  this   he   suppressed the   militia,  dismissed  the   Cortes,  and   restored  the   Constitution of   1845,   adding   to   it   the   Additional  Act,   which  guaranteed the   Cortes  a   yearly   session  of   4   months  and   the   presentation  of the   budget   at   the   opening   of   the   session.

But  the   old   Moderate  party,  strengthened  by   the   defeat  of   the Progressists,  resumed  its   influence  over  the   Queen.  She  dismissed O'Donnell  and   formed  the   Narvaez  ministry  of   Moderates only,   October,  1856.   This  ministry  abolished  what  was  left   of the   revolution  of   1854:   the   Additional  Act,   the   law   of   disamortization, and   the   administrative  law ; they   restored  the   former  system and   even  aggravated  the   press   law.  This   reaction  lasted  two years  under  three  ministries.

In   1858   Isabella  recalled  O'Donnell.  He   held   the   government five   years   without  interruption,  and   the   Cortes  completed  their legal   term  without  being   dissolved - an  unprecedented  thing. The  Liberal  Union  supported  the   government  as   "   the   only   way to   escape  anarchy  on  one   hand,   or   despotism  on   the   other."  It was  a   third   party   between  the   two  old   extreme  parties.  O'Donnell's  policy   consisted  in   avoiding  bi'tter  conflicts  in   domestic affairs  by   taking   no   decisive  measures,  and   in   turning  public   attention to   foreign  policy.   He   restored  the   law   of   disamortization, but   by   an  agreement  with  the   Holy   See,   whereby  the   right   of acquiring  property  was  recognised  in   the   Church.  He   promised a   liberal  press   law,   but   did   not   present   it.   On   the   other   hand,   he brought  Spain   into  the   Morocco  war,  the   conquest  of   San   Domingo, the   Mexican  expedition,  and   the   trouble  with   Peru.  He added  to   the   deficit  of   the   ordinary   budgets   'a   deficit  of   the   special budget,  estimated  at   $50,000,000.  The  Liberal  Union  gradually lost   its   supporters;  the   Queen   returned  to   the   Moderates  in   1863, and   in   1864   restored  Narvaez.

The  Revolution  of   1868. - The  return  of   the   Moderates  to power   began   to   make  apparent  the   transformation  of   parties   and public   opinion  in   Spain.  The  absolutists,  abandoning  the   Carlists   little   by   little,   had   gone  over  to   the   Queen's   support;  the Moderates,  thus  re-enforced,  gave  up   their  constitutional  and   liberal views   to   become  absolutist  and   Catholic.  Isabella,  feeling   no longer  obliged  to   lean  on   the   Liberals,  revived  the   tradition  of Catholic  absolutism  and   government  by   the   camarilla;  the   most influential  persons  about  her   were  the   favourite  Marfori,  Father Cirile,   a   Franciscan  who   had   become  Bishop   of   Toledo,  Father Claret,  formerly  a   soldier,  now  a   bishop,   and   Sister  Patrodnio, condemned  by   the   courts  for   simulating  the   scars  of   the   Passion. The  Queen's  husband,  who  was  on  openly  bad  terms  with  the Queen,  had  almost  no   influence.  The  camarilla  was  hostile  to O'Donnell  and  urged  the  Queen  to   display  her  devotion  to Catholicism.  She   refused  until  1864   to   recognise  the   Kingdom of   Italy,   and   the   diplomats  had   to   remonstrate  with  her   before she   would  pardon  the   Spanish  Protestants  condemned  to  the galleys.

The  Liberal  parties,  out  of   hatred  to   the   camarilla,  became revolutionary.  The  Progressist  party   declared  itself,   by   a   manifesto, unwilling   to   take   further  part   in   the   elections.  Since  1863 it   had   presented  no  candidates,  believing  that   nothing  short  of revolution  would  improve  the   situation.  A   democratic  party,

favouring  universal  suffrage  and  a  republic,  was  constituted  in the   maritime  provinces,  Catalonia,  Valencia,  and  Andalusia,  and in   Madrid.  The  opposition  was  no   longer  directed  against  the ministry;  it   attacked  the   dynasty  itself,   exciting  public   opinion against   the   scandals  of   the   court.

The  Moderate  ministry  replied  with  a   blow  at   journalists  and professors.  Every  article,  before  being   printed,  must  be   submitted to   the   authorities,  who  might   forbid  it,   and   the   paper  might be   suspended  at   the   third  warning  given   for   these  unpublished articles.  Castelar,  a   democratic  professor  at   the   University  of Madrid,  was  excluded  from  his   chair.  The  rector  was   dismissed; the   students  wished  to   give   him   a  serenade,  which  the   government authorized,  then   forbade.  The   result  was  a   riot,   in   which a   hundred  were  killed  and   wounded.  The  government  ordered the   dissolution  of   all   clubs  in   which  politics   were  discussed.

The  Progressists  endeavoured  to   excite  the   army  against  the dynasty;  General  Prim,  an  exile,   organized  insurrections.  The first   miscarried.  That  of   Madrid,  in   June,   1866,   was  the   work   of the   artillery   sergeants,  who   were  discontented  with  service  in   an army  where  all   official  positions  were  reserved  for   the   pupils   of   a certain  school ; it   resulted  in   numerous  executions.  The  government became  a   military   dictatorship  with  absolutist  principles. Gonzalez  Bravo,  Minister  of   the   Interior,  said  in   the   decree  dissolving the   Cortes:  "   The   time   has   come  for   the   Spaniards  to   be governed  in   the   spirit   of   their   history   and   the   sentiments  which form  their  real  character."  The  Liberal  Union  protested against  military  rule;  the  government  dissolved  the  Cortes, arrested  the   leaders  of   the   party,  and   in   December,  1866,   exiled from  Madrid  Marshal  Serrano,  the   President  of   the   Senate.  The leaders  of   the   Liberal  Union  fled   to   France.

The  absolutist  ministry  held  its   place,   in   spite   of   general   discontent, as   long   as   Narvaez  lived.  This  leader  put   down  all   revolts, and,   having   had   a   new   Cortes  elected,   he   got   his   measures approved  and  carried  a   law   authorizing  him  to   expel   from  his home,  and  later  to   imprison,  any  citizen  regarded  as  a  suspect. The  speech  from  the   throne  announced  administrative  and  educational reforms   to   "   fortify   the   policy   of   firm   resistance  to   revolution "   and  to   maintain  "   the   tradition  of   the   common  action  of Church  and  state."  The  Pope   sent  Queen  Isabella  the   golden rose. Jution

After  Narvaez'  death,  in   1868,   Gonzalez  Bravo  wished  to   continue the   system.   But   he   realized  that   the   army  was  slipping

away   from  him;   he   had   several  of   the   generals   arrested  and   imprisoned and   the   Duke  of   Montpensier  driven  from   Spain.  Then the   leaders  of   the   three   persecuted  parties,  - Liberal  Union,   Progressists, and   Democrats, - after   long   negotiation,  agreed   to   make a   joint   revolution.  They   took  advantage  of   the   moment  when the   Queen   was  at   the   French  frontier  busy   negotiating  with   Napoleon III.   for   the   substitution  of   Spanish   troops   for   the   French troops   defending  the   Pope   in   Rome.

The  Revolution  began  with  the  pronunciamiento  of   Admiral Topete,  commander  of   the   Cadiz  fleet;   followed  by   a   pronunciamiento signed   by   the   principal  generals  of   the   opposition,  Prim and   Serrano.  The  cry   was:  "   Down  with  the   Bourbons!  Long live   national  sovereignty!  "   the   declared  object   was  to   establish  a provisional  government  and  universal  suffrage  as   the   "   foundation of   political  and   social  regeneration."  It   was   Andalusia  that first   declared  for   revolution.  There  was  only   one  small  battle,   at Alcolea,  near  Cordova,  on   September  29.   After  this  Madrid, then  all   Spain,   joined   the   insurgents.  Isabella  was   deserted  and fled   to   France.

The  Constitution  of   1869. - The  provisional  government  was set   up   at   Madrid  and   recognised  by   all   the   insurrectional  juntas of   the   48   provinces.  It   consisted  of   the   leaders  of   the   allied  parties, 5   Progressists,  4   Unionists,  and  I   Democrat.  Generals Prim  and   Serrano  were  the   actual  heads.  In   a   circular  to   foreign nations,  and  in   a   manifesto  to   the   people,   they   proclaimed  the principles  of   the   new  system:  sovereignty  of   the   people,   religious and  educational  liberty,   and  liberty   of   the   press.   These  principles were  recognised  by   all   supporters  of   the   revolution;  all called  themselves  enemies  to   the   absolutism  of   court  and   clergy as   "   opposed  to   the   spirit   of   the   century."

They   were  not  agreed   as   to   the   form  of   government  to   adopt. The  Progressists  and  the  Liberal  Union  wanted  a  monarchy "   surrounded  by   democratic  institutions,"  with  a  new  dynasty chosen  by   the   nation.

The   Democratic  party  was  divided :   the   Madrid  Democrats  accepted the   centralized  monarchy;  those  of   Catalonia,  Aragon, and   Valencia  favoured  a   federal  republic.  The  provisional  government declared   that   the   decision  would  be   left   to   the   Cortes summoned  to   make  a   constitution.

The   Cortes  of   1869,   elected  by   universal  suffrage,  I   deputy   for each   45,000  souls,   was   in   great   majority   composed  of   partisans  of the   coalition.  They   voted  by   214   votes  against   71   for   the   mon-

archy,   with   a   liberal  democratic  constitution:  the   Cortes  to   consist of   two   houses,  a   "   Congress  "   elected  for   3   years   by   universal suffrage,  a   Senate  elected  for   12  years   by   special   electors.  All creeds  were  declared  free;   for   the   first   time  Spain   dared  to   inscribe religious   liberty   in   a   constitution.

The  Republicans  replied  with  the   "   Compact  of   Tortosa  "   between the   ii   provinces  of   the   old   crown  of   Aragon;  they   demanded a   federal  republic  and  organized  party  committees.

The  Carlists  had  already  issued  a  manifesto  in   1868;   they   declared themselves  in   favour  of   "   the   national  kingship,"  against  a foreign  monarchy,  and  for   "   unity   of   faith,"  against  religious liberty.  Their  candidate  was  Don  Carlos  VII.,   grandson  of   the youngest  brother  of   the   former  Don  Carlos.

While  awaiting  the  choice  of   a   King,   the   Cortes  gave   the regency  to   Marshal  Serrano,  by   193   votes  against   45.   The  Carlists   immediately  revolted,  under  the   leadership  of   the   priests. Serrano  suspended  the   guarantees  and   put   down  the   insurrection. He   then  asked  the   bishops  for   the   names  of   the   priests   who   had left   their   churches  to   make  war,  and   ordered  them  to   summon the   faithful  to   obey   the   government.

Irritated  by   religious  liberty,   which  seemed  an   insult  to   the   old faith,   the   clergy   fought   the   constitutional  party.   The  government wanted  to   make  the   clergy   swear  obedience  to   the   constitution; all   the   bishops   refused,  except  one.  The  government ceased  to   pay   the   ecclesiastical  salaries.  The  Cortes  voted  to adopt   civil   marriage.  This  was  open  war   between  the   clergy   and the   revolution.

At   the   same  time   the   constitutional  coalition  broke  up   over  the choice  of   a   king.   The   Liberal  Union  proposed  the   Due   de   Montpensier,  while  the   Progressists  and   Democrats  wanted  a   foreign prince.  The  Unionists  left   the   ministry.  Prim,   until  his   death, governed  in   the   name  of   the   Progressists.  'He   spent  a   year   in seeking  the   future  King   of   Spain.   He   offered  the   crown  to   the son  of   the   King   of   Portugal,  to   the   Duke  of   Genoa,  son  of   the King   of   Italy,   and   to   the   Catholic  Prince  of   Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen;  this   latter  offer  caused  the   Franco-Prussian  war.  All the   offers  were  refused.

'Finally  Amadeo,  Duke  of   Ao&gt;sta,  son  of   Victor  Emmanuel, consented  to   accept  the   Spanish  crown.  The  Cortes  elected  him by   191   votes  against   115.   But   when  he   arrived  in   Spain,   toward the   end  of   December,  1870,   Prim  had  just   been  assassinated. The  new  King   was  openly  opposed  by   a   Republican  party  and

two  monarchical  parties-the  Carlists  and  the   Unionists.  He had  also  against  him  fanatical  patriots,  who  called  him  the foreigner,  the   nobles,  who   were  unhappy  at   seeing   Democrats  in the   palace   (they   put   on   their   hats   upon   the   King's   entrance  at   the opera),  and  finally   the   clergy,   who   objected  to   a   constitutional King.  His  power  was  so  weak  that  at   the   elections  of   March, 1871,   his   partisans  gained   a   bare  majority.  There  were  185 deputies  in   the   opposition,  including  60   Republicans  and  65 Carlists.

Amadeo  wished  to  govern  as  a  parliamentary  King.  He chose  his   ministers  from  the   majority  formed  by   Progressists and   Democrats,  the   remnant  of   the   coalition  that   had   compassed the   revolution  of   1868.  But   this   coalition,  left   without  a   recognised leader   by   the   death  of   Prim,   broke  into   two   hostile  factions, the   Progressists  with   Sagasta,  the   Radicals  with  Ruy   Zorilla,  two civil   leaders.  There  was  no   longer   a  majority.  The  ministry resigned.  The  King   protested  against  these  changes,  "   which are  only   the   result  of   intrigues  between  parties   or  groups   ";   but he   did   not   succeed  in   forming   a   conciliation  ministry..  He   called upon   both  parties   in   turn:  he   took  a   Radical  ministry  in   July, 1871,   which  sent   him   on  a   tour  of   the   Republican  provinces  in   the northeast;  then   two   Progressist  ministries,  in   October  and  December, 1871,   under   whose   advice  he   dissolved  the   Cortes.  The Progressist  ministry  obtained  a   strong  majority,  229   against   137, with  18   doubtful.  The   Carlists  then  revolted;  the   majority  prepared to   establish  a   military  dictatorship,  according  to   Spanish custom  in   case  of   trouble.  But   no  one  could  persuade  the   King to   sign   the   decree;   the   Progressist  ministry   retired  in   June,   1872. The  two   former  monarchist  parties,  the  Moderates  and  the Liberal  Union,  after  making  overtures  to  one  another,  became one.  Isabella  had   abdicated  in   favour  of   her   son,   Alphonso,  who was  still   a   minor;   Montpensier  supported  him  as   the   legitimate representative  of   the   hereditary  constitutional  monarchy.  The combined  Moderates  and   Unionists  became  the   Alphonsists,  who, in   June,   1872,   pronounced  themselves  in   favour  of   Alphonso with   Montpensier  as  regent. pared

The   Radical  Cordova-Zorilla  ministry  announced  its   decision in   favour  of   " restoring  peace  without  special  measures  "   by   observing the   constitution.  It   had   a   new  Cortes  elected  in   which the   majority  was   Radical.  The   ministry  proposed  great   reforms; compulsory  military  service,  support  of   public  worship  by   the provinces  and   communes,  exclusion  of   the   clergy   from  political

and  administrative  offices.  The  bishops  protested.  Then  came the   conflict  with   the   artillery   officers.  These  had   put   one  oi   their number,  Hidalgo,  under  "   boycott,"  for   favouring  the   Republican insurrection  of   the   sergeants   in   1866;   the   ministry   appointed him  captain-general  of   the   Basque  provinces;  the   officers  protested, demanded  his   recall,   and   then   resigned   in   a   body.   This was  open  war  between  the   Radical  government  and  the   two  most powerful  bodies  in   Spain,   the   clergy   and   the   army  officers.

The  Kepublic  (1873-74). - Amadeo  had  had  enough  of   this democratic  royalty  and  the   isolation  in   which  the   aristocracy  left him  and   his   court.  The   grandees  had,   contrary  to   custom,  made no   demonstration  at   the   birth  of   his   child.  He   abdicated  and   left Spain;  on   February  12,  1873,   the   Cortes  proclaimed  the   Republic by   256   votes  against   32,   and   elected  a   ministry.

The  Republicans  were  not  long   in   dividing.  The  Radicals, who  supported  the   Republic,  wished  to   preserve  a   centralized  system and   keep   the   Cortes  elected  in   1872,   in   which  they   had   a majority.  The  old   Republicans,  elected  by   the   provinces  of   Aragon  and   Andalusia,  demanded  a   federal  republic  and   the   election of   a   new   Cortes  to   make  a  new  constitution.  The  Radicals rested  on  the   Cortes,  the   Federalists  on  the   ministry,  in   which the   Cortes  itself,   under  the   pressure  of   opinion,   had   put   the   former leaders  of   the   federalist  Republicans:  Castelar,  an   Andalusian, and  Pi   y   Margall,  a   Catalonian..  The  conflict  ended  in   a  coup d'etat.  The  Cortes,  in   adjourning  in   March,  had   left   a   standing committee,  composed  of   a   majority  of   Radicals  and   Alphonsists. The  generals  offered  to   rid   them  of   the   Federalist  ministry;  the ministry  got   ahead  of   them,   drove  out  the   committee,  and   convoked a   Cortes  for   the   making  of   a   constitution  (May,   1873).

The  new  Cortes  was  Federalist  and  elected  a   Federalist  ministry, which   proposed  a   federative  constitution  copied   from  the United  States : Spain   to   be   divided  into   self-governing  states,  and the   Church  to   be   separated  from  the   state.  But   the   Federalists agreed  only   in   principle;  they   differed  as   to   the   extent  of   territory to   be   given   to   the   states.  Should  each  state  consist  of   one of   the   old   historic  provinces,  or  one  of   the   48   new  ones,  or  of a  still   smaller  subdivision,  a  canton?  Must  a  single   state  be made  of   Andalusia  or   Sevilla,  of   Cadiz  or   Cordova?  The  first president,  Pi   y   Margall,  a   translator  and   disciple  of   Proudhon, inclined  toward  self-governing  cantons.  The  Cantonists  took advantage  of   this   to   revolt  at   Sevilla,  Malaga,   Cadiz,   and   Alcoy; they   called  themselves  intransigents,  declaring  themselves  so-

cialists  and   partisans  of   the   International.  At   Alcoy   the   insurgents massacred  a   number  of   employers  and   set   fire   to   factories with  petroleum.  They  seized  the  fortified  city   of   Carthagena, and,   with  the   aid   of   the   galley-slaves,  defended  themselves  there until  January,  1874.

In   July,   1873,   the   Cortes,  finding   Pi   too   much   of   a   Cantonist, gave   the   power  to   Salmeron,  professor  at   the   University  of   Madrid, an   avowed  adversary  of   capital   punishment.  Then,   to   oppose 'the   Carlists   and   Cantonists,  they   voted  the   re-establishment of   martial  law,   which  permitted  the   shooting  of   insurgents.  Salmeron  retired  in   September,  1873.

The  Cortes  gave  the   presidency  to   the   leader  of   the   moderate Republicans,  Castelar  the   orator,  and  then  adjourned  until  the end   of   the   year   in   order  to   give   him   time   to   restore  order.  Castelar, provisionally  renouncing  federalism  and   liberal  government, returned  to   Spain's  traditional  resource - a  centralized  military dictatorship.  He  suspended  constitutional  liberties  by   decree, forbidding  any   Spaniard  to   leave  his   home  without  permission, commanding  newspapers  not  to  excite  insurrection  or  approve any  rebellious  act,   also  restoring  the   system  of   warnings  and suspensions  for   the   press.

When  the  Cortes  came  together  again,  Castelar  called  for   a vote  of   thanks,  which  was  refused.  General  Pavia,  governor  of Madrid  and  a   friend  of   Prim,   offered  Castelar  to   rid   him   of   the Cortes.  Castelar  refused  and  resigned  on   January  2,  1874. Pavia  made  his   coup   d'etat  alone ;   without  leaving   the   Cortes  time to   elect   another  president,  he   invaded  their  hall   with  his   troops, on   January  3,   and   drove  out  the   deputies.  He   then  handed  over the   power  to   a   committee  of   Progressists  and   monarchist  Radicals, under   the   generals.  The   army  once  more  controlled  the government.

The  new  ministry  announced  its   intention  to   preserve  the   republic with   the   Constitution  of   1869,   and   promised  to   convoke the   Cortes,   as   soon  as   order   was  restored.  Meanwhile,  there  was a   military   dictatorship.  The  government  suspended  the  guarantees, suppressed   Carlist   and   Cantonist  publications,  dissolved all   political   societies  "   which  conspired  by   word  or   deed  against the   public   safety   and   national  honour."  Marshal  Serrano  was appointed  president  of   the   executive  power.

During  all   these   struggles  the   Carlist  insurrection  was  going on.  It   was  a   repetition  of   the   first   Carlist  war.  The   insurgents operated  at   once   in   the   west,   in   the   Basque   provinces,  and   in

Navarre,  with  a  practically  regular  army  of   mountaineers, amounting  to  30,000  men - in   the  east,   in   Catalonia,  and  the Maestrazgo,  with  ill-disciplined  bands.  Don  Carlos'  capital   was Estella,  in   Navarre.  As   before,  the  peasants,  incited  by   the priests,   fought   on  their  side   or   helped   them  secretly;  while  the cities  resisted  them.  They   besieged  Pampeluna  and  Bilbao  without being   able   to   take   them.  As   before,   it   was  a   barbaric  war; prisoners  were  often  massacred;  the   Carlists  even  shot  the   correspondent of   a   German  newspaper.  They   broke  up   the  railroads, fired   on   the   trains   or  stopped   them,   and   even,   in   Catalonia, forbade  any   railroad  employee  to   approach  the   track  under penalty  of   being   shot.

The   Restoration  of   1874. - Serrano's  military  dictatorship  satisfied neither  Republicans  nor   Monarchists.  The  generals  were tired  of   the   republic   and   went  over  to   the   Alphonsist  party.   Alphonso,  on  attaining  his  majority,  November  28,   1874,   pronounced in   favour  of   the   constitutional  monarchy:  "   I   shall  never cease  to   be   a   good   Spaniard  and   a  good   Catholic  like   all   my predecessors,  and,   as  a   man  of   the   century,  a   true   liberal."

The  restoration  was  at   hand.  Martinez  Campos  proclaimed it   in   the   pronunciamiento  of   Murviedro,  December  29,   1874;   the other  generals  joined   him.  Serrano  offered  no  resistance.  Alphonso  XII.  was  recognised  as   King   of   Spain.  The  power passed  into  the   'hands  of   the   Alphonsist  coalition  of   Moderates and   Unionists.  Their  leader  was  a   former  disciple  of   O'Donnell, a   civilian  named  Canovas  del   Castillo.

The  ministry  governed  for   two  years  under  the   form  of   a   dictatorship. It   was  busied  at   first   with  fighting  the   Carlists  and conciliating  the   clergy.  The  Carlists  made  a   long   resistance. Finally,  in   February,  1876,   the   two  armies  that  were  operating against  them  forced  them  to   take  refuge   in   France.

The  clergy   had  supported  the   Carlists,  the   Pope   having   declared Carlos   VII.   the   legitimate  King.   In   order  to   reconcile them,  the  government  raised  the  church  appropriation  from $150,000  to  thirty   times  that  amount,  and  promised  to  settle the  arrears  of   church  salaries  so   far  as  the  war  expenses would  allow.  It   closed  the   Protestant  chapels  and   schools  that had  been  established  since  the   Revolution,  abolished  civil  marriage, and   declared  that   the   state  would  settle  its   relations  with the   Church  in   harmony  with  the   Holy   See.  The   Pope   thereupon consented  to   recognise  Alphonso.  But  the   settlement  was  difficult to   make.  The  nuncio  demanded  a  return  to  the   Con-

cordat  of   1851   and   the   unity   of   the   faith.  The   committee  appointed to   draft  a   plan   of   constitution  had   divided  into   two parties :   the   Moderates  wished  to   restore  the   Constitution  of   1845, while  the   Unionists  and   Progressists,  united  under  the   name  of Constitutionalists,  upheld   the   Constitution  of   1869;   they   managed to   agree   on   a   mixed  scheme  which  admitted  religious  toleration.

The  government  next  regulated  the   condition  of   the   Basque provinces.  In   1876   it   set   up   as  a   principle  "   the   constitutional unity   of   Spain."  This  meant  the   abolition  of   the   fueros,   in   spite of   the   protests  of   the   Basque   delegates.  The   government  ordered the   local  authorities  to   declare  that   they   submitted  in   principle to   the   Spanish   laws.  On   the   other  hand,   it   made  the   concession that   these  laws  should  be   applied  only   gradually  and  that  the local  administrations  should  be   preserved.  But  it   began  the work  of   assembling  the   new  recruits  for   the   army   by   sending a   large   army  of   occupation,  to   avoid  troubles  (1877);  it   also levied  direct  taxes  and  dismissed  the   councils  that  protested. Thus  the   second  Carlist  war  ended  in   the   complete  union  of Spain.f

The  Cortes,  finally   elected  in   January,  1876,   and   composed  of ministerial  deputies,  voted  the   constitution,  including  Article  I : "   The   Apostolic  Catholic  religion  of   Rome  is   the   national  religion; the   nation   assumes  the   obligation  of   supporting  religion and  its   servants.  No   one   is   to   be   disturbed  on  account  of   his religious  opinions  nor   for   the   form  of   his   worship,  provided  he does  not  violate  the   respect   due   to   Christian  morality.  Public exhibitions  and  ceremonies  of   any  other  than  the   national  religion are   forbidden."  *   The   Pope   protested  against   "   the   toleration of   non-Catholics  as  an  attack  on  the   truth  and  on  the rights   of   the   Church."

The  dictatorship  was  declared  at  an  end  and  constitutional guarantees  restored  in   the   last   part   of   1876;   but   the   decrees  that had   organized  the   dictatorship  were  not  abrogated;  the   government held   the   press   and   public   meetings   at   its   mercy.

*   The  restrictions  on  religious  liberty   gave  rise   to   a   jurisprudence  which forbade  to   non-Catholics  any  religious  act  in   the  street,  any  placard  or emblem  on   the   outside  walls  of   buildings.  The  "   respect  due  to   Christian morality  "   has   been  interpreted  to   condemn  any  person  who  refused  to remove  his   hat   in   presence  of   a   religious  procession,  or  of   the   viaticum, and   to   regard   as   a   crime  public   mockery  of   a   Catholic  dogma.
- f The  Cuban  insurrection,  begun  toward  1868,  was  not  put   down  until 1878.  Martinez  Campos  was  sent  to   Cuba,  and  restored  peace   by   making terms  with  the   insurgents.

The   Constitutional  Monarchy. - The  Constitution  of   1876   established a   liberal  constitutional  monarchy:  the   King   inviolable,  the ministers  responsible,  and  the   Cortes  divided  into  two*   houses: a   Congress  elected  by   the   taxpayers  and   a   Senate  composed  of dignitaries,  life   members,  and   members  elected  by   the   provincial councils.  In   reality   the   Cortes  is   always,   as   before  the   revolution, of   the   same  opinion  as   the   ministry,  and   the   choice  of   the ministry  depends  on  the   personal  will  of   the   sovereign.  The King   is   thus   master  of   the   government.

Alfonso  XII.  had  received  a   foreign  military  education;  he busied  himself  almost  exclusively  with  the   army,  endeavouring to   organize  it   on   the   German  model  and   to   restore  discipline  in the   official  corps;   he   refused  to   restore  revolted  officers  to   their rank.  He  left  civil  affairs  to   the   prime   minister.  Thus  was formed  a   regular   system  of   government,  parliamentary  in   appearance, which   is   still   in   operation.  The   government  appears  to rest  on   the   majority  in   the   Cortes;  even  ministerial  crises  occur, apparently  brought  on   by   political  questions,  but   in   reality   by personal  rivalry   between  certain  party   leaders,  among  whom  the sovereign  makes  his   choice  from  variable  motives.

The  parties   were  reorganized  under  new  names.  There  were two  constitutional  monarchist  parties,  who  held  the   power  alternately. The   Conservatives  wished  to   maintain  the   system  established by   the   restoration,  and   accepted  only   financial  and   military reforms ; they   were  supported  by   the   clergy   and   aristocracy.  The Liberals,  'also   called  Constitutionalists,  later  the   Dynastic  Left,   declared their   acceptance  of   the   Constitution  of   1869;   they   demanded the   return  to   civil   marriage,  liberty   of   the   press  and   of association,  and   jury   trial;   also   extensions  of   suffrage  until  universal suffrage   should  be   reached.  This   party,   formed  by   former Progressists,  has   been  enlarged  by   a   number  of   Unionists  and a   fraction  of   the   Democrats.  Both  parties  are   led   by   veterans of   the   revolution,  the   Conservatives  by   Canovas  del   Castillo,  the Liberals  by   Sagasta.  Outside  of   the   constitution  still   exists  the Carlist  party   of   the   north,   very  much  enfeebled,  and   the   Republican party,   supported  chiefly   in   the   maritime  provinces  of   the east.  The  Republicans  were  at   first  a  united  party,   but   about 1883   they   divided  into   sections  which  have  at   times  tried  to   work together:  socialist  Federalists,*  under  Pi   y   Margall;  democratic

*The  secret  society  of   the  Black  Hand,  discovered  in   1883   among  the peasants  of   Andalusia,  seems  to   have  been  only   a   local  movement;  the scheme  is   supposed  to   have  had  in   view  the   equal   distribution  of   wealth.

Progressists,  favouring  revolution,  under  Zorilla  and   Salmeron; and  Possibilists,  under  Castelar,  who  finally   decided  to   support royalty.

The  Conservative  party  that   brought  about  the   restoration  was in   control  a   long   time.  But   Canovas,  weakened  by   his   rivalry with  Martinez  Campos,  since  1879   general  under  the   restoration, was  abandoned  by   the   King   in   his   conversion  of   the   debt   in   1881. Then  began  a   series  of   Liberal  ministries,  directed  by   the   Sagasta-Martinez  Campos  coalition,  and  lasting  until  1884.  Then Canovas  was  restored  to   power  and   fought   against   the   Republican press.

At   the   death   of   Alphonso  in   November,  1885,   his   widow,  Maria Christina,  an   Austrian  princess,  took  the   regency  in   the   name  of the   child  about  to   be   born,   Who   became  Alphonso  XIII.  She then  governed  in   her   son's  name.  She   seemed  at   first   to   summon Liberals  to   the   ministry   by   preference.  In   1890   universal suffrage  was  restored,  with  the   consent  of   the   Conservative  party. Universal  suffrage  seems  to   have  made  little  change   in   the   practical conditions  of   political   life;   the   ministry   continues  to   have the   majority.  Of   late   years   the   Queen   Regent   has   rested  more on   the   Conservative  party.   A   Canovas  ministry  was  maintained from  July,   1890,   to   December,  1892,   in   spite   of   Republican  protest; it   resigned  before  the   excitement  produced  in   Madrid  by Conservative  administration  of   the   municipality.  But  the   Sagasta   ministry,  on   its   return  to   power,   did   not   dare   keep   up   the system  of   repression  organized  by   Canovas  against  the   Republicans. It   weakened  its   position  by   announcing  the   intention  of making  certain  economies  to  check  the   alarming  growth  of   the deficit.  The  opposition  was  so  strong  that  it   had   been  able  to elect  120   deputies  (60   Conservatives,  50   Republicans,  and  even a   few   Carlists);  the   ministry  could  detach  from  the   Republican party  only   a   small  group  of   possibilists,  who   rallied  to   the   support of   the   monarchy,  and   it   was  vigorously  opposed  in   the   Cortes. The  new  taxes  were  received  with  riots  in   the   Basque  country and   in   Catalonia.  Martinez  Campos,  governor  of   Catalonia,  having put   down   a   riot   with   great   difficulty,   the   Anarchists  of   Barcelona made   two   attempts  with   bombs,   one  upon   his   family   at   the theatre  in   Barcelona,  the   other  upon   himself.  The   Liberal  ministry replied   with   executions,  special   laws,   and   prosecutions against  suspected  Anarchists,  who  have  accused  the   government of   using   means  akin  to   torture  in   order  to   extract  confessions. In   the   meantime  the   ministry  had   been  driven  by   public   opinion

into  a   petty   war   in   Morocco.  At   length,   after  two  reconstructions of   the   ministry  in   1894,   the   Cuban  revolt  of   1895,   with   its increasing  dangers  for   the   monarchy,  brought  back  the   Canovas ministry  (December,  1895).  The  Cuban  war  and,   since  1896,   the war  against  the   insurgents  in   the   Philippines,  have  cost  much in   money  and  men,  and  have  absorbed  all   Spain's  political activity.

Insurrections  have  become  very  rare;  pronunciamientos  have ceased.  Spain   seems  to   have  grown  accustomed  to   a   civil  government; some  of   the   generals   in   1889   even  complained  to   the Cortes  that  the   army  no   longer   played   the   part   to   which  it   was entitled,  and   that   the   cabinets  were  no   longer   presided  over  by generals.  The  officers  were  also  indignant  at   certain  newspaper articles  against   the   army;   in   1889   they   demanded  press   jurisdiction for   councils  of   war,  and   in   1895   groups  of   officers  invaded the   offices  of   several  opposition  journals  at   Madrid.

## PORTUGAL.

The  Constitution  of   1826. - Portugal,  at   the   end   of   the   eighteenth century,  was,   like   Spain,   governed  by   the   camarilla  and clergy ;   the   absolute  sovereign  left   the   power  to   his   court.  The Cortes  met  no  longer,  and  the  grandees  were  pushed  aside. Catholicism  was  obligatory;  the  Church  controlled  the   censorships of   books,  education,  and  the   Inquisition.

As   in   Spain,   regeneration  began   with   foreign   occupation.  The English  army  sent  to   drive  out  the   French  took  possession  of   the country  and  organized  the   Portuguese  army.  The  royal   family had,   in   1809,   fled   to   Brazil  before  the   French  invasion,  and   remained there   even  after   the   restoration.  Portugal  was  governed despotically  by   the   English   general   Beresford,  who  was appointed  commander-in-chief  with  a   junta   of   regency  to   assist him.  The  government  persecuted  secret  societies  in   particular. A   decree  of   1818   made  it   treason  to   join   one.  "   Whosoever  sells, gives,   lends,   or   hands  to   another  a   medal,  seal,   symbol,  picture, book,  catechism,  or   instruction  relating  to   these  cursed  societies shall   be   punished  by   transportation  of   from  4   to   6   years."

As   in   Spain,   it   was  the   army   that   overturned  this   system.  It was  discontented  with  receiving  no  pay  and   having   to   obey   foreign commanders;  many  officers  who  had  become  Liberals,  if not   Free  Masons,  by   reading  foreign   books  or   by   contact  with the   English,  desired  a   constitution.  A   plot   to   drive  out  the   English in   1817   had   met  with   cruel  repression.  But   in   1820,   at   the

news  of   the   Spanish  insurrection,  the   Portuguese  army  also   revolted; first,   in   the   north   at   Oporto.   Beresford  was   in   Brazil at   the   time,   warning  the   King   of   the   danger   he   ran   if   the   army were  not  paid.   The  insurgents  formed  a  provisional  government which  refused  to   admit  Beresford  on   his   return  from Brazil,  and  asked  the   King   to   return.  They   complained  that Portugal  was  being   governed  as  a   Brazilian  colony.  The  King, John   VI.,   convoked  the   Cortes  to   draft  a   constitution;  it   adopted the   Constitution  of   1822,   copied   from  the   Spanish   Constitution  of 1812.  The  King   accepted  it.

Two  parties  were  formed,  Constitutionalists  and  Absolutists. The  Constitutionalists,  divided  into   two  parties,   as   in   Spain,   were at   first   intrusted  with   the   power.  But   the   restoration  of   1823   in Spain   encouraged  the   Absolutists;  the   King   gave   them  the   government, and   restored  the   old   historic  constitution,  the   pretended Charter  of   Lamego.

As   in   Spain,   it   was  a   conflict  over  the   succession  that   definitively established  the   constitutional  system.  John   died   in   1820, leaving  two  sons.  The  elder,   Pedro,  had   remained  in   Brazil  and had   just   proclaimed  himself  Emperor  there.  The  other,  Miguel, had   returned  to   Portugal  with  his   father  and   became  the   head  of the   Absolutist  party;   but   in   1824,   having   attempted  an   insurrection against   his   father,   he   had   been  driven  from  the   country. Pedro,  not  wishing  to   come  and  reign   in   Portugal,  yielded  his rights   to   his   seven-year-old  daughter,  Maria  da   Gloria,  and   promulgated the   Constitutional  Charter  of   1826.  This  was  a   granted charter,  and   established  a  constitutional  monarchy  like  that  of Louis  XVIII.  in   France.

The  Cortes  consisted  of   two  houses,  the   hereditary  House  of Peers  and   the   House  of   Deputies,  elected  for   four   years   by   propertied voters,   the   election  being   indirect.  The   Cortes  had   the legislative  power,  voting   the   budget   and   the   laws,   subject   to   the King's  sanction.  The  executive  power  belonged  to  the  King, who  exercised  it   through  'his   ministers.  The  constitution  also attributed  to   the   King   the   moderating  power,  conceived  by   Benjamin Constant;  this   was  the   right   to   dissolve  the   house,  create peers,  choose  and   dismiss  the   ministers - all   the   rights   exercised by   the   constitutional  monarchs  of   the   period.  There  was  nothinpnew   in   it   but   the   phrasing   of   it.   The   constitution  guaranteed in   principle  all   the   liberties  of   citizens - liberty   of   the,   person,  of property,  of   residence,  of   the   press,  and   of   petition.  Religious equality  was  not  granted;  Catholicism  remained  the  religion  of

the   kingdom,  but   it   was  admitted  that   "   no  one  ought   to   be   disturbed on   account  of   his   religion."  But   all   these  guarantees might   be   suspended  by   a   law   or  even  a   royal   decree.

Pedro  had  chosen  his   brother  Miguel  as   his   daughter's  guardian and   regent,   on  condition  that   he   should  recognise  the   constitution and   promise   to   marry   the   young   Queen;   meanwhile  he intrusted  the   regency  to   his   sister.  The  Absolutist  party  revolted, demanding  Miguel   as   King,   but   the   Regent   succeeded in   maintaining  her   position,  thanks  to   Canning's  English  army (1826).  But  when,  in   1828,   the   English  government  (Wellington) changed   its   policy,   Miguel   returned  to   Portugal.

He   declared  himself  ready   to   accept  the   constitution  and   recognised Queen   Maria;   but   he   gave   the   power   to   the   Absolutists and  the   clergy   and   dismissed  the   houses.  He   then  convoked the   Cortes  according  to  the   old   Constitution  of   Lam   ego,  and proclaimed  himself  King   in   1829.  He   was  supported  by   the army  and  clergy.  Then  began  the   persecution  of   the   Liberals. According  to   Liberal  traditions,  there  were,   in   six   years,  17,000 persons  executed,  16,000  transported,  and  26,000  imprisoned. Miguel  even  arrested  a  number  of   Frenchmen  and   Englishmen; an   English   fleet,   followed  by   a   French  fleet,   came  in   1831   to   force him  to   give   satisfaction.

Maria's  supporters  joined  the   Liberals  in   the   struggle  with Miguel.

The  Azores  Islands  had  remained  faithful  to   Queen  Maria. With  the   aid   of   the   English,   an  expedition  was  prepared  in   these islands  to   reconquer  Portugal.  Pedro  had   abdicated  the   Empire of   Brazil  and  was  once  more  in   Europe  directing  operations. The  war  was  a   long   one.  In   1832   Pedro  had   taken  possession  of Oporto,  a   Liberal  centre,  but   could  go   no   further.  An   army  sent by   sea  to   the   extreme  south  forced  Miguel  to   evacuate  Lisbon. He   continued  the   war   in   the   interior  with   the   aid   of   Don   Carlos. The  Quadruple  Alliance  sent  a   Spanish  army,  which  finally drove  Miguel  from  the   kingdom  in   1834.   The  Constitution  of 1826  was  restored.  Maria  became  of   age,  and   married  a   prince of   Coburg,  a   kinsman  of   the   King   of   Belgium.  The  monasteries were  suppressed.

Struggles  between  Chartists  and  Septembrists  (1834-52). When  Miguel  was  conquered  he   had  promised,  in   consideration of   a   yearly   allowance,  to   renounce  the   crown  and   never  return to   Portugal.  The  Absolutist  party   had   no   longer   a   part   to   play. As   in   Spain,   the   Liberals  were  divided  into  two  parties.  The

21

Chartists  wished  to   maintain  the   Charter  of   1826,   which  gave   the King   all   the   real   power;   the   Septembrists  wanted  the   Constitution of   1822,   establishing  the   sovereignty  of   the   people.

As  in   Spain,   political  struggles  concealed  personal  rivalries. As   in   Spain,   the   parties   fought   by   means  of   military  insurrections; the   officers,   restive  at   receiving  no  promotion,  and   the soldiers  at   receiving  no  pay,   determined  which  party  should  have the   mastery.  As   in   Spain,   the   elections  always   gave   the   majority to   the   party   in   power.   But   in   Portugal  the   revolutions  have   been less   violent,  repression  less   cruel,   and   the   oratorical  contests  less dramatic.  The  English,  who  control  the   wine  trade,  have  often interfered  to   produce  or   to   moderate  political  revolutions.  The clergy   have  taken  a  much  less   important  part   than  in   Spain;   it is   also   said   that   the   Free   Masons  have   had   a   more  continuous influence  on  politics.

Like  the   Spanish  Moderates,  the   Chartists  have  been  the   favourite party   at   court,   the   one   that   has   most  often   occupied   the ministry.  The  mass  of   the   population  has   remained  indifferent to   political   life.   The   movements  are  always   set  on   foot   in   Lisbon, the   capital,   or   in   Oporto,   the   city   of   the   north  and   the centre  of   the   wine  trade,   or   in   Coimbre,  the   University  city. These  three  cities  support  the   opposition  party,  corresponding  to the   Spanish  Progressists;  but   that   party   has   never  been  powerful and   has   rarely   taken  action  except  with  help   from  discontented generals   or   grandees.

In   1836,   at   the   news  that   the   Spanish   Progressists  had   just restored  the   Constitution  of   1812,   the   Portuguese  opposition party   brought  about  a   military  revolt  and  forced  the   Queen   to restore  the   Constitution  of   1822.  This  was  the   revolution  of September,  1836,   which  gave   the   party   the   name  of   Septembrists. The  Septembrists  took  the  power  and  reformed  the  constitution as   the   Spanish  Progressists  had   done,   making  the   Constitution of   1838,   which  gave   the   crown  the   veto  on   bills  and established  two   houses.

The  Septembrists  lost   the   ministry  through  a   military  revolution in   1842.  The  Chartists  restored  the   Charter  of   1826  and kept   the   power   in   spite   of   insurrections  in   1844,   1846,   1847,   and 1851.  Their  leader,  Costa  Cabral,  governed  after  the   fashion  of Narvaez.  The  party  then  went  through  an  evolution  toward absolutism,  less  marked,  however,  than  that  of   the  Spanish Moderates.

The   Regenerators  and   the   Deficit. - As   in   Spain,   an  opposition

coalition  was  formed,  similar  to   the   Liberal  Union,  a  coalition between  the  Septembrists  and  discontented  Chartists.  Its leader  was  the   old   marshal  Saldanha,  a   Chartist  minister  who wished  to   revenge  himself  on   Cabral.  The  party  gave   itself  the name  of   Regenerador,  and  undertook  to   regenerate  Portugal.

The  revolution  of   1852   forced  the   Queen   to   give   the   ministry to   the   Regenerators.  They   reformed  the   Charter  by   the   Additional Act   of   1852,   establishing  direct  suffrage   and   lowering   the qualification  for   voting.  Since  1852   the   qualification  has   been so   low   as   to   admit  nearly   a   half-million  voters.

The  party   did   not  remain  long   'United.  Saldanha  governed as  a   dictator;  the   former  Septembrists  became  discontented  and left   him   to   form   the   Historic  Left,   led   by   a   Grand  Seignior   of   the Free  Masons,  the   Marquis  of   Louie.  Later  the   reformist  party was  formed,  and  merged  with  the   Historic  Left  in   1877   under the   name  of   Progressists.

The  number  of   electoral  districts  was  diminished  in   1869. Hereditary  peerage  was  abolished  in   1885.   Representation  of minorities  was  established  for   the   election  of   deputies  by   the   revision of   1884-85.  Payment  of   deputies  has  been  abolished. The  civil  codes  were  finally   voted  in   1868  and   the   code  of   procedure in   1877,   conformably  to   the   promise  of   the   Charter  of 1826.

The  principal  difficulty  is   still   in   voting   the   budget.  Portugal is   burdened  with  a   debt  too   heavy   for   her   resources,  and   still further  increased  by   the   foreign   loans  made  by   Miguel   at   usurious rates,   which  the   constitutional  government  has   accepted. The  deficit,  now   become  chronic,  can   be   met  only   by   loans,   and thus  the   debt  goes  on   increasing.

Several  plans   for   avoiding  a   deficit  have   been  tried:  the   number of   general  officers  for   an  army  of   30,000  men  was  reduced from  142   to   32;   a   part   of   the   salaries  of   the   office-holders  was held  back;  food  taxes  were  established.  Pereira,  minister  from 1871   to   1877,   tried  to   overcome  the   deficit  by   extending  commerce and   industry.

But  the  debt  still  increases.  From  39,000,000  milreis  in 1853   it   had   increased  in   1873   to   233,000,000,  in   1890   to   428,000,000.  In   forty   years,  1853-92,  it   has   increased  on  an  average by   8,000,000  milreis  a   year.*  It   was   decided  in   1892   to   suspend payment  of   the   interest  on  two-thirds  of   the   debt.  Financial embarrassments,  conflicts  with  the   clergy   on  the   subject   of   ex-

*The  milreis  is   worth  about  $1.20.

communicating  Free  Masons  (1882-84),  and  with  the   English government  on  the  question  of   the   African  colonies  (1889-92) have  given   Portugal  an  agitated   public   life.*

Little  by   little  the   parties   have  been  displaced.  The   former Chartist  party   has   been  replaced  by   the   Regenerators,  who   form the   Right;   the   Progressists  form  the   constitutional  Left.  Outside of   the   constitution  a   Republican  party   has   sprung  up   in   the large   cities  and   among  the   students  and   has   been  organizing clubs  and   demonstrations  since  1881.  This  party,  encouraged  by the   fall   of   the   monarchical  system   in   Brazil  in   1889,   has   begun   a constitutional  agitation  and  even  insurrections.  The  government has   replied   with   special   measures  and   the   King   has   even modified  the   constitution  by   decree.f

Portugal  has   re-entered  upon  a   period   of   political   crises.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.*- See  Ch.-V.  Langlois,  "Manuel  de  Bibliographic," 1896.  There  is   not  yet   an   historical  bibliography  for   either  Spain   or Portugal.  On  Spanish  institutions,  Torres  Campos,  "   Bibliog.  Espafi.  Contemp,   del   Derecho  y de   la   Politica,"  1883.

## SPAIN.

DOCUMENTS.- For  events  up   to   1840,  Baumgarten  (see   below)  gives   a list  of   contemporary  accounts  ;   the  most  important  are  Miraflores, "Memorias  para  ...  la  Hist.  Contemp.  de  .  .  .   Isabel  II. ,"   1843. Burgos,  "   Annales  del   Reinado  de   Isabel  II.,"   1850;  both  conservative. For  subsequent  events,  the   most  reliable  accounts  are  to   be   found  in   foreign annuals  :   "   Annual  Register"  ;   "   Annuaire  des   Deux  Mondes,"  up   to 1870.- Schulthess,  "   Europ.  Geschichtskalender,"  since  1860.  See  also  the political  articles  in   the   "   Revista  de   Espana."§

- For  government  acts  and  Cortes  documents,  see  Torres  Campos, "   Staatsrecht  d.   K.   Spanien,"  1889.

WORKS.- COMPLETE  HISTORIES  :   The  great  general  history  of   Spain,

*   Several  times  since  the   Spanish  revolution  of   1854   there  has   been  talk of   an   Iberic  Union;  z.   e.,   a   union  between  Spain   and   Portugal.  The  idea, originated  by   Spanish  Republicans,  has  never  been  popular  in   Portugal.
- f There  have  been  several  sovereigns  since  the  death  of   Maria  in   1853   : Pedro  V.   in   1853,   Luis  I.   in   1868,   and   Carlos  I.   in   1889.
- \   It   has   not   been   possible  for   me,  with  the   resources  at   my   command in   Paris,  to   draw  up   a  satisfactory  bibliography  of   works  in   Spanish and  Portuguese.
- § I   refrain  from  citing   the   various  descriptions  of   Spain   and  Portugal in   the   manner  of   De   Amicis,  which  give   political  anecdotes  and  peculiar customs  without  naming  authorities.

M.   de   Lafuente,  "   Hist.  General  de   Espana,"  28   vols.   (several  edits.)   stops   at the   death  of   Ferdinand.  It   is   continued  by   Pirala,  "   Hist,  de   la   Guerra Civile,"  2d   edit.,   1868.  "Hist.  Contemp."  (from   1843   to   1875),   6   vols.,   1875. The  common  faults  are  prolixity  and  lack  of   criticism.  For  the  period previous  to   1839,   it   is   best   to   resort  to   Baumgarten,  "   Geschichte  Spaniens," 3   vols.,   1865-71   (Staatengesch.  coll.).  In   French,  Hubbard,  "   Hist.  Contemp. de   1'Espagne,"  4   vols.  1882-84,  chiefly   interesting  for   the   history   of   political customs.- Reynald,  "Hist,  de   1'Espagne  jusqu'en  1873,"  is   a  poor sketch.

EPISODES:  H, Bruck,  "Die  Geheimen  Gesellschaften  in   Spanien,"  1881, Catholic,  and  with  little  criticism. - De   Mazade,  "Revolutions  de   1'Esp. Contemp."  (1854   to   1868),   1869,   gives   little  more  than  the   "   Annuaire  des Deux  Mondes. - W.   Lauser,  "Gesch.  Spaniens  von  dem  Sturz  Isabellas," 2   vols.,   1877,   a   fairly   good   history   of   the   revolutionary  period   from  1868  to 1875,  more  accurate  than  Cherbuliez  "   L'Espagne  Politique,  1868-73," 1874.- On  the  Carlist  war:  Valras,  "Don  Carlos  VII.  et   PEspagne Carlista,"  2  vols.,  1876,   Carlist. - Wedel,  "   Die  Carlistische  Armee  und Kriegsfiihrung,"  1876,   accurate  details  on  means  of   fighting.  In   English, E,   H.   Stroebel,  "   The   Spanish  Revolution,"  a   good   narrative  from  the   fall   of Isabella  to   the   accession  of   Alphonsus  XII.  in   1874,   Boston,  1898.

INSTITUTIONS.- For  the  whole  :   Torres  Campos,  "   Das  Staatsrecht  d.   K. Spanien,"  1889  (Marquardsen  coll.),  picture  of   the  actual  organization, with  some  historic  details  of   the  igth   century.  On  the   Cortes,  Borrego, "   Hist,  de   las   Cortes  de   Espana   durante  el   siglo   XIX.,"  2   vols.,   1885.- For the   administration:  Colmeiro,  "   Derecho  Admin,  de   Espana,  "4th   edit.,  3 vols.,   1876-80.

## PORTUGAL.

FOR  THE  COLONIES  :   A,   Zimmermann,  ' '   Kolonialpolitik  Portugals  und Spaniens"  (in   his   "Europaische  Kolonien"  I),   Berlin,  1896.

DOCUMENTS.- ON  THE  PERIOD  OF  THE  FORMATION  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION :   "Documentos  para  a   historia  das  cortes  geraes  da   na§ao  Portuguesa,  1820-28,"  4   vols.,  1883-87.  For  the  succeeding  period  see  the Annuals  ;   the   "   Annuaire  des   Deux  Mondes  "   gives   a   great   deal  of   information. TION

WORKS.- I   know  of   no  complete  history,- Schaefer,  "   Geschichte  von Portugal,"  vol.  v.,  1854   (Gotha  coll.),   stops  at   1820.- Arriaga,  "Hist,  da Revolugao  Portuguesa  de   1820,"  4   vols.,  1886-89,  verv  diffuse  and   declamatory.

POLITICAL  INSTITUTIONS  :   Tavares  de   Medeiros,  "   D.   Staatsrecht  d.   K.   Portugal," 1892   (Marquardsen  coll.),  gives   an   historical  exposition  and  a bibliography.

## CHAPTER  XL

ITALY.

The  Restoration  in   Italy.  - Italy,   conquered  by   the   French armies,  had   been   for   fifteen  years   divided  into   three   parts,   all   subject to   the   French  government:  ist,   the   Kingdom  of   Italy (Lombardy,Venetia)  under  Beauharnais,  Napoleon's  stepson;  2d, the  Kingdom  of   Naples  under  Murat,  Napoleon's  brother-inlaw;   3d,   the   portions   annexed  to   the   French  Empire  (Piedmont, Genoa,  Tuscany,  Parma,  Rome).  The  two  Italian  dynasties  had fled   to   the   islands,   the   court  of   Turin  to   Sardinia,  the   Bourbons of   Naples   to   Sicily.

French  rule  did   not  give   Italians  national  independence,  and it   imposed  on   them  heavy   military  burdens ; Napoleon  took  with him  to   Russia  27,000  men  from  the  Kingdom  of   Italy   and brought  back  only   1000.  On   the   other  hand,   French  administration introduced  into   Italy   modern  ways,  equality   before  the   law, personal  liberty,   and   unity   of   laws  (the   Napoleonic  code   had   become Italian   law).   Convent  estates  had   been   secularized.  Thus the   country  had   been  prepared  for   political  unity,   and   already   a number  of   patriots  were  conspiring  against   Napoleon  for   the   independence of   the   Italian  nation.

The  victory  of   the   Allies  made  Italy's   position  even  worse. They   restored  everywhere  the   political  arrangements  which  had prevailed  'before  the   Revolution,  except   in   the   two   Republics  of Venice  and  Genoa,  which  were  not  re-established.  The  other provinces  were  given   back  to   their  former  owners,  and   Italy   was once  more  cut  up   into   little  states  :   the   Kingdom  of   Sardinia  enlarged by   the   addition  of   the   former  territory  of   Genoa;  the duchies  of   Tuscany  and  Modena,  given   back  to  two  Austrian archdukes;  the   duchy   of   Parma,  given   to   the   ex- Empress  Marie Louise;  the   principality  of   Lucca,  the   States  of   the   Church, the   Kingdom  of   Naples.  (Murat,  first  spared,  then  driven  out, was  seized  for   treason  and   shot   in   1815.)   Austria  took   her   former province   of   Lombardy,  added  Venetia,  and   formed  the   Lombardo- Venetian  kingdom.  These  arrangements,  begun  in   1814, modified  by   Napoleon's  return  in   1815,   were  not  completed  until 1817.

326

All   these  states  were  monarchical,  and   in   all   of   them  the   restored prince   found  himself  absolute  sovereign,  free  to  reestablish the   old   regime   in   his   own  way.

The  King  of   Sardinia  officially  re-established  ecclesiastical authority,  restored  to   the   clergy   their  control  of   marriage,  set   up once  more  the   laws  punishing  by   death  the   profanation  of   the Host,  abolished  religious  freedom,  re-established  ecclesiastical censorship  of   books  and  set  apart  new  estates  for   the   Church. The  University  was  placed   under  a   committee  of   overseers  ; in   the library   these  locked  up   dangerous  books,  such  as   Montesquieu. In   his   hatred  of   France  the   King   expelled   by   decree  several  thousands of   Frenchmen  and  ordered  the  destruction  of   a   botanic garden  at   Turin,  as   the   work  of   the   invaders.  The  municipal council,  in   order  to   save  a   bridge   over  the   river   Po,   menaced  by the   same  motive,  had  a  church  built  there  as  a   votive  offering.

The  Duke  of   Modena  re-established  the   old   laws  of   1771  and persecuted  the   Jews.  The  Duke  of   Tuscany,  in   re-establishing the   convents,  contented  himself  with  giving   them  an  endowment; the   former  Church  lands  were  left  with  their  lay   possessors. Tuscany  had  been  reformed  in   the   eighteenth  century  by   the Emperor  Leopold,  and  so  the   former  system  there  did   not   differ materially  from  that  of   France.

In   the   States  of   the   Church  the   restoration  was  radical.  The civil  administration  was  replaced  by   Church  authority.  The Pope   re-established  the   Inquisition  and  all   the   convents  (1824 monasteries,  612  nunneries).  The  country  was  divided  into  18 legations,  each  governed  by   a   Cardinal  legate.  Lay   officeholders were   dismissed,  the   Napoleonic  Code   abolished.  Vaccination and   street   lighting   in   Rome  were  suppressed  as   French institutions.  The  Church  government  busied  itself  with  the   pursuit of   secret  societies,  especially  the   Free  Masons.  But   it   was too   feeble  to   suppress  the   brigands,  who,   descending  from  the mountains,  plundered  even  the   villas  in   the   outskirts  of   Rome. nation

In   the   Kingdom  of   Naples,  the   King   preserved  the   most  important of   the  French  institutions:  the  abolition  of   the   privileges of   the   nobles,  the   French  civil   law   and   penal   code,   the   administration of   the   communes  by   state  officials  (intendants),  the system  of   finance  and   even  the   conscription - that  is   to   say,   the new  social  and  administrative  organization.  He  showed  his hatred  of   the   French  by   refusing  to   drive  in   the   new  strada  di Posilipo,  which  had   been  built  during   their  rule,   and   by   stopping the   excavations  at   Pompeii,  which  had  been  actively  pushed leges

328  ITALY.

"   during   the   foreign   occupation."  With  the   Church  he   made  a compromise;  he   did   not  restore  all   the   secularized  lands,   nor   did he   re-establish  all   the   convents  nor  all   the   bishoprics.*

In   1806  there  had  been  132   bishoprics  for   a  population  of 5,000,000  souls;  Murat  had  reduced  the   number  to   43;   the   concordat made   with   the   Pope   (1818)   allowed  19   archbishops  and 56   bishops.  '1   he   restored  government  was  accused  of   capricious application  of   the   laws;   the   King   voluntarily  pardoned  the   brigands who   had   fought   in   his   name  against   the   usurper  Murat. A   mounted  band  of   brigands  became  so   dangerous  that   the   government in   1817   hired  them  to   make  war  on   the   other  brigands, then  had   them  massacred  in   cold   blood.

In   Italy,   as   in   Germany,  the   restored  sovereigns  did   not  entirely restore  their   former  system.  From  the   Revolution  they accepted  the   abolition  of   the   privileges  enjoyed  by   the   nobility (majorats,f  exemption  from  taxes,  seignioral  courts),  the   secularization of   convent  lands,   and   the   regulation  of   administration and   finance.  What  they   did   restore  was  mainly   the   authority  of the   clergy   and   the   political   police;   the   restored  system  consisted in   the   absolute  government  of   the   court,  police,   and   clergy.J

It   discontented  the   Liberals,  who  had   become  so  numerous  in the   Italian  cities,   especially  at   Milan,   at   Naples,   and   in   Romagna. These  wanted  a  constitutional  liberal  government,  independent of   the   Church.

The   arrangements  made  by   the   Congress  of   Vienna  wounded Italian  national  sentiment  also.  'Metternich  had   refused  to   allow the   Congress  to   establish  a   committee  on   Italian  affairs  like   that which  had   charge   of   Germany:  he   showed  that  Germany  was  a political  body;   Italy,   on   the   contrary,   "   represents  simply   a   group of   independent  states,  united  under  the   same  geographical  term." Thus  was   dismemberment  made  the  normal  condition  of   Italy. And   in   this   dismembered  Italy   foreigners  were  supreme.  A   foreigner, the   Emperor  of   Austria,  possessed  the   Lombardo- Venetian Kingdom   and   sent  to   Milan,   as   his   governor,  an   Austrian archduke;  the   three   sovereigns  of   Tuscany,  Modena,  and   Parma were  Austrians. tian

Even  over  the   sovereigns  who  were  Italian,  Austria  had  an *The  following  figures  are  given,   but   without  satisfactory  authority:

1806:  47,008  priests,    25,000  monks,      26,000  nuns

1837:  26,000        "         11,400       "  9,590     " f A   right   of   persons  holding  hereditary  titles  to   entail  property  in   conjunction with   their   titles.- TR.

t Stendhal,  who   examined  this   regime  carefully,  gives   a   description  of   it in   his   famous  romance,  "   La   Chartreuse  de   Parme."

almost  irresistible  influence.  She  made  the  King   of   Naples promise  not  to   introduce  into  his   states  institutions  incompatible with  those  of   the   Lombardo- Venetian  Kingdom.  Metternich even  tried  to   form   between  the   Italian  sovereigns  a   confederation which  Austria  would  have  controlled.  The  King   of   Sardinia, supported  by   the   Tsar  Alexander,  refused  to   join,   and   upset  the plan.

The  political  condition  of   Italy   after  1815   may   be   denned  by three  characteristics:  small  states,  absolute  governments,  and dependence  upon  Austria.  Italian  patriots  and  liberals  demanded national  unity,   constitutional  government,  and   the   expulsion of   outsiders.  But  they   had   to   wait  30   years   for   a   chance  to work  together,  and   agitated  at   first   only   by   local  revolutions.

The  Military  Bevolutions  of   1820  and   1821. - The  first   movements were   the   work   of   army  officers  and   secret  societies.  There existed  already  in   Italy   secret  societies  when  it   was  under  French control.  The  most  active  of   these,  the   Carbonara,  had  been founded  probably  about  1807   in   the   mountains  of   the   Kingdom  of Naples  and  recruited  among  the   charcoal  burners  of   Calabria. Its   object   was  to   drive  out  the   French.  Its   origin   is   legendary, but  its   organization  is   known:  the   Carbonari  were  formed  in lodges   (ventes);  the   members,  admitted  after  a   ceremony  of   initiation, swore  to   obey   the   orders  of   the   chiefs;   the   lodges   were federated  under  the  direction  of   the   High   Lodge.  The  Carbonara had   its   principal   centre  in   the   Kingdom  of   Naples;   the number  of   members  was  estimated  at   60,000  after  1816,   among whom  were  many   bandits  who  injured  the   society   by   their  crimes. The  Carbonari  were  also  numerous  in   the   States  of   the   Pope (especially  in   Romagna)  and  in   Austrian  Italy   (especially  in Lombardy).  After  the  restoration  their  aim  was  changed:  their object   now  was  to   expel   the   Austrians  and   establish  a   united Italy   with   constitutional  government;  the   French  were  no   longer their  enemies,  and  so   became  their  allies.

At  the  same  time  Free  Masonry  was  gaining  ground  in Italy.  These  two  secret  societies  differed  in   character:  the   Carbonari were  conspirators  ready   to   lead  an  armed  revolution. The  Free  Masons  had  only   a   humanitarian  aim.  But  both  were made  up   from  the   same  classes,  among  the   liberal  middle  class, which  opposed  the   power  of   the   clergy,   and   military   officers,  who were  displeased  with  the   restoration;  both  were  organized  in   the form  of   a   federation.  Perhaps  they   were  in   secret  connection through  some  of   their  chiefs  who   belonged  to   both  societies;  they

330  ITALY.

were  jointly   pursued  by   the   governments  and   condemned  by   the Pope.*  The  absolutists  tried  to  oppose  them  with  rival  absolutist societies:  the   Calderari,  reorganized  in   1816   by   the   minister of   police   in   Naples;   the   Sanfedists,  in   the   States  of   the   Church. They   fought   each  other  by   denunciations  and   murders,  of   which it   is   impossible  to   get   an  exact  account.

To   tell   the   truth,   the   Italian  revolutionists  did   not  succeed  in organizing  any   original  movement;  they   made  nothing  but   imitation revolutions,  induced  by   foreign   example  and   based  on  programs and   plans   copied   from  foreigners.  It   was  the   Spanish revolution  of   1820  that   furnished  the   model  for   the   Italian  revolutions; they   were  military,  like   their  model,  at   Naples   in   1820,   at Piedmont  in   1821.

At   Naples,  many  of   the   military   officers  h'ad   served  in   Murat's army;  these  "   Muratists  "   reproached  the   government  with  refusing them   promotion  and   desired  a  constitution.  Although many  officers  were  Carbonari,  there  had  been  no   formal  conspiracy: the   chiefs   did   not   dare   to   risk   an   insurrection.  The revolution  was   begun   by   two  sub-lieutenants  of   cavalry   with  the cry   of   "   Long  live  the   King   and   the   Constitution!  "   They   led their  men  toward  Naples.  The  Carbonari  followed  them;  the army   did   not  stop   them.  The  King   became  alarmed,  and   announced that   'he   would  willingly  grant  a   constitution.  Without waiting  to   draw  up   one,   they   promulgated  the   "   Constitution  of Spain."  The  King   took  the   oath,   adding   an   invocation  of   his own  to   God,   "   If   I   lie   or   break  my   oath,   hurl   the   thunderbolt  of thy   vengeance  upon  my   head."  This  constitution  was   democratic, modelled  after  the   French  Constitution  of   1791,  which  gave   the power  to   a   single   chamber.  The   King   reserved  the   right   to   get this   plan   modified  by   the   Assembly.  The  Assembly  was  elected and   met  at   Naples;  the   majority  were  ready   to   vote  the   modifications which   would  make  the   constitution  acceptable  to   the French  government.  But  the  Carbonari  had  founded  lodges  in every  regiment  and  gathered  together  at   Naples  a  general assembly  of   delegates  from  all   the   provinces;  they   bullied  the government,  appointed  the   police,   and  managed  the   work  of   recruiting. Their   supporters  in   the   assembly  obstructed  the   discussion of   the   constitution.

In   Sicily,   the   Palermo  insurgents  had   first   demanded  an   inde-

*The  documents  cited  to   prove  a   connection  (Deschamps,  "   The  Secret Societies  and  Society  ")   were  drawn  up   too   long   after  the   events,  or  else by   too   prejudiced  witnesses,  to   make  categorical  affirmation  possible.

pendent  government,  with  a  royal   prince,  so  as  to  permit  the existence  of   a  personal  union  only.   But   the   Sicilians  had   sent their  representatives  to   the   Assembly  at   Naples,  and   the   people of   Palermo,  frightened  by   the   prevailing  massacres  and  pillage, concluded  to   recognise  the   government  of   the   Neapolitans.

Austria  undertook  to   crush  the   Naples   rebellion.  She   had   refused to   recognise   the   constitution,  reminding  the   King   of   the promise,  made  in   1815,   that   he   would  not  establish  in   his   kingdom any   institution  contrary  to   those  of   the   Austrian  states. She  made  preparations  to  send  an  army  to   Naples  and  reestablish the   old   government.  The  Tsar  and   the   French  government, after   some   hesitation,  decided  against   the   constitution,  and Metternich  took  advantage  of   the   occasion  to   secure  the   formulation of   the   theory   of   intervention  in   countries  troubled  by   revolution. Delegates   from   the   great   powers  met  at   Troppau/ moved to   Laybach,  and   invited  the   King   of   Naples   to   join   them  in   settling the   affairs   of   his   kingdom   according  to   the   treaties.

Ferdinand  set  out,  after  swearing  to  the   Assembly  that  he would  speak   in   favour  of   the   constitution;  he   returned  with  an Austrian  army  of   50,000  men  sent  in   the   name  of   the   European powers  to   occupy  the   Kingdom  of   Naples  and   put   an  end   to   the government  imposed  by   the   Revolution.

The  government  of   Naples  got   together  two  small  armies,  but after  the   first   encounter  at   Rieti  the   soldiers  disbanded  and   the Austrians  occupied  the   whole  kingdom  without  resistance.  The absolutist  party,  restored  to   power,  forbade  any  person,  under penalty  of   death,   to   have  arms  in   his   possession  or   to   wear  the colors  of   the   Carbonari.  Then  began   a   long   period   of   accusations and   prosecutions.  Many   liberals  were  condemned  to   death or   the   galleys,   others  were  killed  in   the   country  or   fled   to   foreign lands.  In   order  to  prevent  another  military  revolution,  the King,   by   a   capitulation  concluded  for   30   years  with  the   Swiss cantons,  hired  four   Swiss  regiments.

In   the   Kingdom  of   Sardinia,  the   insurrection  was   begun   by   the officers  of   the   garrison   of   Alexandria  (March  10,   1821).   It   was not  simply   liberal,   but   national.  The   insurgents  swore  allegiance to   the   Spanish  Constitution,  as  at   Naples;  but   in   addition  they set   up   the   Italian  tricolour  flag   (green,   white,   and   red)   and   proclaimed the   re-establishment  of   the   Kingdom  of   Italy   and   its   extension over   the   whole  nation.  The  principal  leader  of   the revolt,  the   Count  of   Santa  Rosa,   announced  his   intention  to   deliver the   King   and   the   country   from   the   Austrians  and   prevent tension

332  ITALY.

the   crushing  of   Neapolitan  freedom.  The   conspirators  counted on   Prince  Charles  Albert  of   Carignano,  who   was  said   to   be   allied with  the   Carbonari  and   acquainted  with  the   plot.   The   garrison at   Turin  followed  suit   and   threatened  to   bombard  the   city   if   the King   did   not  accept  the   constitution.

King   Victor  Emmanuel  preferred  to   abdicate  in   favour  of   his brother,  then  at   Modena.  While  awaiting  the   arrival  of   his   successor he   appointed  as  regent  the   Prince  of   Carignano,  who   proclaimed the   constitution,  swore  obedience  to   it,   and   gave   the power   into  the   hands  of   a   special   State  Council,  until   the   election of   the   Assembly.  Santa  Rosa  was  made  minister  of   war. But  the   new  King,   Charles  Felix,  was  an  absolutist  and   unfriendly to   the   Prince  of   Carignano,  and   he   formally  disavowed the   acceptance  of   the   constitution;  he   invited  those  subjects  who were  still   faithful  to   resist  and   asked  help   from   the   Tsar.  Alexander ordered  100,000  men  to   start.  The   Austrian  army  was already  on   the   border.  Santa  Rosa,   when  called  on   by   the   King to   hand   in   his   resignation,  asserted  that   the   King   was  an   Austrian prisoner  and  tried  to   lead   the   army  and   the   students  to   attack Lombardy.  The  troop  of   liberals  met  the   Austrians  before  Novara,  and  after  a  short  combat  dispersed.  The  leaders  took refuge   at   Genoa,   then   left   the   country ;   a   special   commission  condemned to   death  178   of   the   accused,  and   220  officers  were   discharged; the   two  universities  were  closed  for   a   year.   Metternich tried  to   punish   the   Prince  of   Carignano  by   having   him   deprived of   his   rights   to   the   throne  of   Sardinia  and   to   replace   him   by   the Austrian  Duke  of   Modena.  But  the  French  government  supported the   prince,   so   he   was  made  to   do   penance   by   going   with the   French  army  to   fight   the   Spanish   liberals;  he   then   had   to promise  never  to  grant  a  constitution.  In  1831   the  older branch  expired  with  Charles  Felix,   and   the   Prince  of   Carignano became  King   Charles  Albert.

There  had  also  been  a  conspiracy  at   Milan  against  the   Austrians. The   Lombardo-Venetian  kingdom  was  governed  by   a viceroy  (the   Austrian  archduke  Rainier)  and  an  administration partly  composed  of   Italians  assisted  by   councils  formed  of Italian  notables  (the   two  assemblies  of   Lombardy  and  Venetia, and  the   17   provincial  assemblies).  Metternich  himself,  in   1817, recommended  the   choice  of   Italians  in   order  to   show  that   Austria did   not   mean  to   treat  the   kingdom  as  a   German  province.  But the   liberals  could  ill   support  the   Austrian  legislation  which  had abolished  jury   trial   and   public   procedure, - the   secret  police   that

opened  letters  and  set  spies   to   watch  suspected  persons, - the censorship  which  had,   in   1819,   suppressed  the   liberal  journal   Conciliatore.  A   number  of   liberals,  young  men  of   the   middle  class, conspired  at   Milan  (1820).  Thirteen  of   them  were  arrested  and condemned  to   death;  their  sentence  was  then  commuted  to   imprisonment in   the   fortress  of   Spielberg.  One   of   them  was   Silvio Pellico,  who  later  became  famous  for   his   description  of   his   captivity. Another  plot   in   1821   led   to   other   condemnations.

In   the   duchy   of   Modena,  where  the   liberals  had   conspired  with those  in   Naples,  a  special   commission  passed  sentence  on  47 accused  persons.

The   Eevolution  of   1831. - After  the   failure  of   the   military   revolutions all   political  movement  in   Italy   ceased  (except  for   an uprising  of   the   Carbonari  in   the   Kingdom  of   Naples   in   1827). In   the   States  of   the   Church, Pope   Pius   VII. and   his   minister  Gonsalvi,   who   favoured  a   pacific   policy,   had   died   in   1823   and   1824; Pope   Leo  XII.  (1824-29)  pursued  a  policy   of   abolutist  restoration. He   re-established  ecclesiastical  jurisdiction  in   civil   affairs and   the   use  of   Latin  in   the   courts,  gave   the   Jesuits   the   direction of   education  and  ordered  prosecution  of   the   Carbonari.  Men were  condemned  to  prison,  banishment,  or  precetto  politico  - that is   to   say,   to   reside  in   a   city,   forbidden  to   go   out  at   night,   and obliged  to   report  to   the   police   every   two  weeks  and   to   go   to   confession every   month.  Each  subject   was  ordered  to   denounce any  member  of   a  secret  society   under  penalty  of   the   galleys.

A   new  revolutionary  movement  broke  out  at   last,   in   1830,   in the   states  which  had   not   been  in   rebellion,  and   against   the   weakest governments,  at   Modena,  Parma,  and  in   the   States  of   the Church.  This  time  the  French  Revolution  was  taken  for  a model:  the   people   in   the   cities  rose,  as   in   France,  to   demand  a constitution,  a   national  guard,   and   liberty   of   the   press.

The  committee  of   Italian  refugees  prepared  an   insurrection  in the   States  of   the   Church,  taking   advantage  of   an   interregnum offered  by   the   death  of   Pope   Pius  VIII.,  who  died  in   1830. Their  object   was  uncertain;  they   talked  of   proclaiming  Jerome Bonaparte  or  a   son  of   Eugene   Beauharnais  King   of   Rome  (Louis Napoleon  was  in   the   plot),   but   their  great   aim   was  to   rid   themselves of   the   government  of   priests   and   Sanfedists.  The   Duke  of Modena  was  warned,  had  the   conspirators  arrested  at   the   house oi   their   chief   Menotti,  and   sent   for   the   executioner.

Immediately  the   conspirators  in   the   States  of   the   Church  broke out   in   insurrection  ; first   at   Bologna,  then  in   all   the   other  towns

334  ITALY.

in   Romagna,  Umbria,  the   Marches,- everywhere  except  in   the patrimony  of   St.   Peter.  They   formed  national  guards,   then   they established  provisional  governments  composed  of   nobles,  doctors, and  lawyers.  There  was  no  righting;  all   the   laymen,  even  the soldiers,  agreed   together  to   rid   themselves  of   the   Church  officers. The  deputies  met  at   Bologna  and  declared  without  debate  for "   complete  release  from  the   temporal  rule   of   the   Pope   and   complete union   in   a   single   government."  Then  they   published  a manifesto  against  the  Pope's  administration  and  organized  a central  government  composed  of   a   president  and   seven  ministers.

A   provisional  government  was  installed  without  resistance  at Modena  and  in   the   duchy   of   Parma :   there  was   in   each   a   dictator assisted  by   three  consuls.

The  insurgents  hoped  to   be   sustained  by   France,  but   Louis Philippe  would  not  risk   a   war.  The   Austrian  army  occupied  Romagna ; the   insurgents  treated  with  one  of   the   cardinals,  and   submitted upon   a   promise   of   amnesty   (March,   1831).   The   Duke  of Modena  was  presently  restored  by   the   Austrians.  The  envoys of   the   European  powers  met  in   conference,  and  presented to   the   Pope   a   memorandum  recommending  certain  reforms  as preventive  of   a   new  revolution.  The  principles  proposed  were: 1st,   That   reforms  must  be   made  not  only   in   the   rebellious  provinces, but   in   Rome;  2d,   That  laymen   must  be   admitted  to   all   judicial and   administrative  offices;   the   communes  must  have  elective municipal  councils  and  there  should  be   a   lay   state  council  to   restore financial  order.  This  memorandum  answered  the  complaints of   the  inhabitants,  who  were  mainly  irritated  at   being governed  by   churchmen.  Pope   Gregory  XVI.  had  a  scheme  of reform  drawn  up;   but   the   cardinals  were  unwilling  to   divide  the government  with  laymen;  they   agreed  to  reject   the   election  of councillors  and   the   creation  of   a   lay   council.  They   would  only agree  to   create  municipal  councillors,  named  by   the   Pope,   and provincial  councillors  who  had  not  even  the   right   of   petition. The  finances  were  still   controlled  by   ecclesiastical  congregations  ; the   country  was  still  governed  by   prelates,  the   four  cardinal legates  in   the   four   large   provinces,  the   delegated  Monsignori  in the   17   others.

When  the   Austrian  army  withdrew,  the   liberals  re-organized the   national  guards;  the   Pope's   soldiers,  sadly   disciplined,  plundered peaceable   inhabitants;  the   legate   called  back   the   Austrians, who  this   time   were  received  as   liberators.  The  French  government had   declared  that   if   the   Austrians  interfered  again,   it   would

seize  one  of   the   ports   as   a   guarantee;  a   French  garrison  arrived at   Ancona  (1832).  This  was  merely  a   demonstration;  the   Pope took  the   city   again,   and   the   garrison   was  confined  in   the   citadel until  1838.

To   secure  a   defence  against   the   malcontents  the   pontifical  government hired   two   Swiss   regiments  for   20   years  and   encouraged the   Sanfedist  regiments  to  organize  as  volunteers  (militi   centurioni);  in   1832   there  were  30,000  of   them  under  30   commanders: they   swore  to   sacrifice  their   lives   and   their   property  for the   Church  and  its   head,   undertook  to   act  as  a  police   and   to watch  the   liberals.  Pope   Gregory  XVI.  was  more  a   theologian than  a   sovereign  and   left   the   government  to   his   secretary  of   state, Lambruschini,  a   Genoese  absolutist.

Tuscany,  being   the   least  despotic  of   the   Italian  states,   had   no revolution;  she   even  received  refugees.  Some  young  men  in 1831   made  a   plot   to   enter  the   theatre  of   Florence  and   ask   the Grand  Duke  for   a   constitution,  but   they   'did   not   dare   do   it.   The country  remained  under  a  paternal  absolutism.  In   1836,   in   a population  of   1,780,000,  there  were  10,000  secular  priests,  3234 monks,  and   4172  nuns.

Mazzini  and  the   Republican  Party. - Up   to   1831   the   malcontents had   agitated   by   local   insurrections  organized  on   the   spot, and   without  a   common  program.  Then  began   attempts  to   unite all   Italy   for   concerted  action.

The  first  was  under  Mazzini.  He   was  a   Genoese  lawyer,  an enemy  to   his   sovereign  the   King   of   Sardinia.  (The   Genoese  had never  reconciled  themselves  to   becoming  subjects  of   a   Piedmontese.)  He  was  born  in   1808,   but   had   been  living   in   exile  in France  until  1831 ; he   now  changed  his   revolutionary  policy.  He transferred  the   management  of   the   movemenit  to   a   place   outside of   Italy   and   adopted  for   object   the   establishment  of   a   united Italy   as  a   republic.  In   1831   he   founded  Young   Italy,   a   secret society   which  admitted  only   men  over  forty   years  of   age.   Then he   again   enlarged  his   program  and   founded  Young   Europe,  to deliver  the   nations  from  monarchical  governments  and  to   establish everywhere  the   republic   arid   democracy;  each   nation  should form  a  republic  united  to  the   others  by   fraternity.  'In   Young Europe  each  country  formed  a  section  (in   1844   there  were  Young Italy,   Young   Poland,  Young   Germany,  then  Young   Switzerland, Young  France,  and  Young   Spain);  the   whole  was   directed  by   a central  committee.

Mazzini  was  an  enemy  to   the   Church,  but   a   deist   and   a   mysti-

336  ITALY.

cist.  His  motto  was:  "Liberty,  equality,  humanity,  a   God,   a sovereign,  and  the  law  of   God."  Young  Italy   was  recruited mainly  among  the   well-to-do  classes : lawyers,  doctors,  professors, and  officers;  it   formed  a   revolutionary  republican  party,   hostile to   the   Carbonari,  but   employing  the   same  processes, - partial   uprisings and   the   murder  of   princes   and   traitors.  They   accomplished nothing   but   a   series   of   unsuccessful  plots,   in   Piedmont  in 1834,   and   at   Naples   in   1844.*

The  "   Risorgimento." - A   pacific   movement  toward  unity   began in   the   world  of   letters.  It   was  perhaps   prepared  by   the   congress of   naturalists,  organized  in   imitation  of   Germany,  and   held  each year   in   a   different  city   (Pisa,   Turin,   Florence,  Padua).  It   came suddenly  to   the   front  through  the   publication  of   some  political works  which  were  read  all   over  Italy   and   produced  the   effect  of manifestoes.

In   1843   Gioberti,  a  priest   and   theologian  who  had  sought asylum  in   France  in   1831,   published  "   Moral  and   Political  Headship of   Italy."  The  essential  idea  of   his   book  was  that  Italy, destined  by   God   to   be   the   centre  of   humanity,  holds  within  herself forces   sufficient  to   accomplish  her   mission;  it   would  suffice for   her   to   get   back   her   unity   under  the   direction  of   the   Pope,   who would  be   at   once  the   chief   of   Italy   and   of   the   world.  Since  Macchiavelli,  the   Italians  had   regarded  the   Pope   as  an  obstacle  to unity;   Gioberti  made  the   papacy  the   centre  of   the   nation.  But he   accused  the   Jesuits   of   having   compromised  the   Pope's   situation. (He   wrote  against   them  the   "   Modern  Jesuit.")

Count  Balbo,  in   "   The   Hopes   of   Italy   "   (1844),   pointed   out  to the   Italians  the   faults  which  they   must  correct  before  they   could attain  independence.

The   poet   d'Azeglio,  in   "   Recent  Events  in   Romagna  "   (1846), recounts  the   struggles  and   persecutions  of   the   Liberals  in   Romagna in   1845,   and   sets   forth   their   grievances  against   the   Church government  as  presented  in   the   "   Manifesto  of   the   inhabitants of   the   States  of   the   Church  to  the   princes  and  peoples  of Europe.''  While  recognising  the  courage  of   the   rebels,  he   re-

* The  Sicilian  massacres  of   1837,   during   the   cholera,  were  not  political acts;  the   people  believed  themselves  poisoned,  and  massacred  all   who were  suspected.  The  government  of   Naples  seized  the  opportunity  to declare  the   Sicilians  incapable  of   governing  themselves,  and  revoked  the ordinances  of   1816,  which  reserved  to  them  the  civil  and  Church  offices Henceforth  there  was  to   be  no  distinction  between  Neapolitans  and Sicilians.

preached  them  with  forgetting  their  main  object,   the   deliverance of   their   native  land.

The  strange  part   of   it   was  that   these  three  authors  were  Piedmontese,  and  all   three  designated  their  sovereign,  the   King   of Sardinia,  as   the   principal  champion  of   independence.

Thus  began   the   period   called  Risorgimento  (resurrection).  The idea   of   raising   Italy   again   spread   rapidly   among  cultivated  men. It   was  more  a   common  sentiment  than  a  party.  There  was  no organization,  not  even  a  precise  object.  They   desired  reforms, a   liberal  government,  and  the   union  of   all   Italians;  but   as   they did   not  want  a   revolution  to   expropriate  the   princes  who  were opposed  to   a   union,   they   could  think  of   nothing   but   a   federation between  the   sovereigns,  and   all   did   not  agree  about  that.  Should there  be   three  kingdoms  or  only   two?  And  what  place   should the   Pope   have?  These  aspirations  were  confused,  but   men  were agreed  on  two  points:  I.   Italy   must  shake  off   the   foreign   yoke; 2.   She   was  strong  enough  to   effect  her   unity   without  aid.  The motto  was  given   by   King   Charles  Albert:  a  minister  asked  him how  Italy   would  carry  out   her   plans,   and   he   replied:   Italia  fara da   sc   (Italy   will   do   it   alone).

Beginning  with  1846,   three  sovereigns  encouraged  the   national movement:  the   Pope,   the   Grand  Duke  of   Tuscany,  and   the   King of   Sardinia.  At   the   death  of   Gregory  XVI.  (1846)   the   conclave, which  met  at   once  without  waiting  for   the   foreign   cardinals,  rejected Cardinal  Lambruschini,  the   candidate  nominated  by   the Absolutist  and  Austrian  party,  and  elected  the   candidate  of   the Roman  party,   Mastai,  bishop   of   Imola,  surnamed  the   Good,   who took  the   title   of   Pius   IX.  Elected  in   opposition  to   Austria  and supported  by   France,  Pius  IX.   immediately  passed   as   the   liberal Pope   who  was  to  realize  the   national  dream  of   Gioberti.  He was  adored  by   the  Liberals,  and  the   hymn   "   Long   live   Pius IX.!  "   became  a   national  chant  all   over   Italy.

Pius  IX.   granted  his   subjects  several  liberal  reforms:  amnesty for   all   prisoners  condemned  for   political  offences  (July,   1846), opening  of   a   reading   room,  and   a   milder  censorship  for   the   press (March,  1847),   a   Consulta  di   Stato,   formed  of   laymen,  one   from each  province,  chosen  by   the   government  for   two  years   (April, 1847),   and   then  a   national  guard   (July).  Prosecutions  at   once began   against   the   Sanfedists,  who   were  accused  of   conspiring  to massacre  the   Liberals;  some  of   them  were  executed,  others  arrested, and   the   Sanfedist  volunteers  were   disarmed.  However, when  he   received  the   members  of   the   Consulta,  the   Pope   informed

338  1TAL  y.

them  that  he   was  resolved  to  preserve  all   his   authority.  But already  a   political   club   had   been   organized,  the   People's   Club;   the Roman  people  began  to   obey   their  local  officers;  a   mob  went  to congratulate  the   Swiss  consul  on  the   defeat  of   the   Sonderbund, crying:   "   Death  to   the   Jesuits!   "   (November  30,   1847).   Mazzini wrote  the  Pope   to   place   himself  at   the   head  of   the   national movement.

The  Grand  Duke  of   Tuscany  followed  the   example  of   the   Pope. He  was  forced  to   it   by   an  agitation  which  was  revolutionary  at Leghorn,  the  seaport  and  great  trade  centre  of   the   country;  liberal at   Florence,  the   capital,   and   at   Pisa,   the   University  city.   In May,   1847,   Pisa  and   Leghorn  made  a  celebration  in   honour  of Pius  IX.  and  against  the   Austrians  and  Jesuits.  The  Grand Duke  granted  the   modification  of   the   censorship  of   the   press, then  a   Consulta  like   that   of   the   Pope,   then   a   civic   guard.   At Pisa  and  Leghorn  tricolour  flags   were  set  up.   The  Duke  of Lucca  abdicated  and  ceded  his   states  to   Tuscany.  They   abolished the   Tuscan  institution  of   Sbires,   secret  agents   of   the   police, without  uniform  and  now  become  almost  hereditary.

King   Charles  Albert  of   Sardinia  had   hesitated  long.   He   had become  suspected  by   both  Absolutists  and  Liberals  for   his   conduct in   1821,   and   had   forced  himself  to   reassure  the   European governments  by   maintaining  absolute  government,  limiting  himself to   having  the   codes  revised  (1837,   1840)   and   appointing  consultative councils  in   the   provinces.  He   had   laboured  especially to   re-enforce  his   army;   keeping  each  soldier  only   two  years in   the   army  and   eight   years  on   leave,   he   increased  his   infantry to   22,800  men  in   time   of   peace,   61,400   in   time   of   war.  But   he felt   himself  supervised  by   Austria,  which  had   come  to   an  understanding, it   was  said,   with  Ins   own  minister  of   police   and   had got   a   papal   nuncio  established  at   Turin ; he   dared  not   break^   with either  his   absolutist  ministers  or   the   Jesuits;  the   Liberals  had nicknamed  him   Re   Tentenna,  the   Hesitating  King.

The   Risorgimento  movement  at   last   gave   him   courage,  in   1846, to   enter   into   conflict  with   Austria  on  a   question  of   customs  duty. The   Austrian  party   distributed  pamphlets  against  him;   in   answer to   these   the   Genoese  made  a  great  celebration  for   the   fiftieth anniversary  of   the   expulsion  of   the   Austrians  (December,  1846). The  English  government,  in   rivalry  with  Austria,  hastened  to send   a   special   envoy  to   Charles  Albert,  promising  support,  and urged   him   to   conclude  a   customs  union  with  the   Pope   and   Tuscany. The   King   still   hesitated,  in   spite   of   the   congress  of   nat-

uralists  in   1847,   now   become  a   political   assembly  for   the   discussion of   reforms;  in   spite   of   the   anti-Austrian  manifestations  in Genoa  and   Turin.  Finally  he   issued  the   reform  laws  which  abolished privileged   courts,   deprived   governors  of   police   control,  increased the   powers  of   municipal  councils,  and   modified  the   censorship. To   this   independence  movement  the   Austrian  government replied   by   establishing  a   garrison   at   Ferrara  and   making alliances  with  the   Dukes  of   Modena  (1846)   and   Parma  (December, 1847). sorship.

The   Revolutions  of   1848. - The  excitement  was  so   intense  that the   Italians  did   not   wait   to   follow  the   example  of   other  nations.

Since  the   early   part   of   January,   1848,   there  had   been   outbreaks in   the   Lombardo- Venetian  kingdom.  The  inhabitants  had   never accepted  foreign  rule ; they   boycotted  the   Austrian  garrisons,  and the   Italian  ladies  refused  to  meet  the   German  officers.  The Lombardo- Venetians  complained  of   the  Austrian  censorship which  forbade  the   publication  of   any  political  discussion,  of   the administration  where  native  deputies  had   no   influence,  of   the   secret police   which  had   spies   in   every  commune,  and,   above  all, of   the   Austrian  financial  system,  the   octroi  of   cities,   the   taxes  on the   sale   of   drinks,   on  markets  and  bakeries,  and  the   tobacco monopoly.  It   was  estimated  that  the   Emperor  drew  from  his Italian  subjects  a   quarter  of   his   whole  revenue,  while  they   did   not form  an  eighth   of   the   population  of   his   empire.

To   strike  the   government  in   its   finances,  Italian  patriots  decided to   con-sume  no  more  cigars.   On   Sunday,  January  2,   at Milan,  anyone  showing  himself  in   the   street  with  a  cigar   was insulted  or  else   the   cigar   was   knocked  out  of   his   mouth.  Austrian soldiers  walked  about  smoking  ostentatiously  and  were stoned.  The  dragoons  charged,  and  a   few  persons  were  killed. Like  scenes  occurred  at   Padua  between  students  and   soldiers.

The  revolution  began   in   Sicily.  The  Liberals,  having   vainly petitioned  the   King,   posted   a  call   to   arms  all   about  Palermo. The  government  arrested  ten  of   the   leaders.  On   the   appointed day   (January  12)   the   people   assembled,  a  number  of   insurgents made  barricades:  the   fighting  was  confused,  with  several  days intervening,  from  January  12  to   27;   the   troops   bombarded  the city,   then  retired.  The  general  committee,  composed  of   men of   the   high   nobility,  distributed  the   ministries  among  themselves; there   was  no   talk   of   dethroning  the   King,   the   insurgents asked  for   nothing  but   the   re-establishment  of   the   Sicilian  Constitution of   1812.

340  ITALY.

In   Naples   the   mob  marched  before  the   palace   crying:   "   Long live   the   King   and   the   constitution!"  Ferdinand,  hearing  that he   could  not  count  on  the  army,  promulgated  a   constitution (January  29)   on  the  model  of   the   French  Charter.  Then  he formed  a   ministry  under  a   formerly  proscribed  Muratist  and   Carbonaro,  Bozzelli.

This  revolution,  the   first   of   all   the   revolutions  of   1848,   aroused the   Liberals  all   over  Italy.   In   the   Kingdom  of   Sardinia,  the Genoese  had  begun  by   demanding  the   expulsion  of   the   Jesuits and  the   creation  of   a   national  guard.  The   journalists  of   Turin decided  to   hold  a   meeting  for   the   discussion  of   reforms.  Cavour  proposed  to   demand  a  constitution  (January  6).   After  the revolution  of   Naples,  the   city   council  of   Turin,   composed  mainly of   nobles,  voted  a   petition  to   ask   for   the   constitution  and   the national  guard.  The  King   decided  at   last   and   granted  the   Constitutional Statute   (February   8),   which  later   became  the   Constitution of   the   Kingdom  of   Italy.   In   Tuscany  the   Grand  Duke granted  a   constitution,  equally  modelled  on  the   French  Charte.

At   Rome  the   Pope,   when  giving   his   blessing  to   a  crowd  assembled under   his   balcony   (he   was   then   living   at   the   Quirinal), added :   "   I   ask   you   to   cease  making  certain  demands  contrary to   the   sanctity   of   the   Church,  which  I   neither  can,  nor  ought,   nor will  admit."  But  he   appointed  three  lay   ministers  and,   as was  done  in   the   French  Revolution,  granted  the   prayers  of   his subjects  and  promulgated  the   Fundamental  Statute  for   the   temporal government  of   the   States  of   the   Church  (March   14).   There were  two  councils,  one  of   100   deputies  elected  by   property  owners, the   other   of   peers   appointed  by   the   Pope,   a   lay   State   Council and  a  ministry.  But  the  College  of   Cardinals  remained  the supreme  power,  charged  with  the   rejection  or  approval  of   laws, and,   in   spite   of   the   liberty   of   the   press,   the   censorship  of   religious books  continued.

In   the   Italian  countries  occupied  by   Austrians  the   revolution of   '48   was  the   result  of   the   revolution  in   Vienna  (see   chap, xiii.).   The   Austrian  government,  disorganized,  threatened  on all   sides   by   national  revolts,  abandoned  its   Italian  provinces. The  Milanese  revolted;  the   Austrian  geheral-in-chief,  Radetzky, fearing   to   have   his   communication  cut  off,   retired  with   his   army into   the   Quadrilateral,  a   sort  of   entrenched  camp   formed  by   four strongholds,  between  Lombardy  and  Venetia.  The  Lombards then   formed  a   provisional  government,  which  tried  to   organize an  army.  At   Venice,  a  republican  lawyer,  Manin,  was  ap-

pointed  president  of   the   provisional  government,  and   thus  proclaimed the   revolution:  "   Long  live  the  Republic  and  Saint Mark!"  The  Austrians  abandoned  Modena,  which  had  broken out   in   revolution,  and   Parma,  where  the   Duke  gave  a  constitution (March,   1848).

Until  now  the   revolution  had  been  liberal,  monarchical,  and national.  In   the   various  states  the   people   had   hoisted  the   tricolour flag,   the   symbol  of   Italian  unity,   and   the   princes   had   appeared disposed   to   unite   against   the   foreigner.

The  Liberals  of   Piedmont  wanted  to  seize  this  occasion  to drive  out  the   Austrians;  Cavour  wrote,  on   March  23,   in   the Risorgimento,  a   moderate  newspaper:  "   We,   people   of   cool   reason, accustomed  to   listen  to   the   commands  of   reason  rather  than  to the   emotions  of   the   heart,   we  say   aloud  there  is   but   one  way   open to   the   nation,  the   government,  and   the   King:   war,  and   immediate war."  The   King   decided  to   mobilize  the   army  and   sent it   into   Lombardy.  The  armies  of   Tuscany,  of   the   Pope,   and   of Naples  set  out  to   join   the   Piedmontese  army.

Internal  Discords. - There  were  two  causes  of   weakness  in   this revolution,  i.   The  Italians  had  not  sufficient  military  force  to drive  out  the   foreign  power  without  help;   the   Sardinian  army, the   only   one  that   was  ready   for   war,  consisted  of   only   60,000 men,  two-thirds  of   whom  were  in   the   reserve.  2.   They   were  not agreed  on  the   form  of   government  they   wished  to   adopt;   the Absolutists  desired  a   return  of   the   old   government;  the   Liberals, after  having   worked  together,  split   into  two   hostile  parties,  the constitutional  monarchists  and  the   radical  republicans;  each  of the   two  had  its   own  solution  of   the   national  problem.  The Monarchist  party   desired  to   establish  unity   by   a   federation  between the   princes;   its   leaders  were  notable  Liberals  who  relied upon  the   governments.  The  Republican  party,   directed  by   Mazzini   and   his   friends,  wished  to   convoke  a   general  parliament  to determine  the   fate   of   Italy;   it   was  recruited  among  the   people   in the   large   cities,   especially  Genoa,  Milan,  Rome,  Leghorn,  and Naples,  and   looked  for   the   support  of   the   French  Republicans.

The  struggle  between  the   three  parties   began.  The  Constitutionalists predominated  in   the   north   of   Italy,   the   Republicans  in the   centre,  and   the   Absolutists  in   the   south.  The   south  started the   reaction.  The  Chamber  which  was  elected  in   the   Kingdom of   Naples  in   accordance  with  the   new  constitution  was  composed of   Liberal  Constitutionalists;  before  it   had  time  to   meet the   King   took  advantage  of   a   Republican  outbreak  in   Naples   to

342  ITAL  Y.

dissolve  it   (May   15);   he   then  suppressed  the   daily   papers  and recalled  the   army  which  he   had  sent  to   the   aid   of   the   Piedmontese.  The  Calabrians  revolted  and  were  subdued.  A   new Chamber,  elected  by   incomplete  elections,  came  together  in   July; it   expressed  its   regret   at   the   recall  of   the   troops,   because  " the resurrection  of   Naples  cannot  be   accomplished  without  independence and   the   establishment  of   Italian  nationality,"  and   demanded the   completion  of   the   elections  and   the   control  of   the budget.  But  the   Absolutist  ministry,  encouraged  by   the   Austrian victory,   adjourned   the   Chamber  (September  5)   and   suppressed the   Liberal   newspapers.   They   then   sent  the   army   to reconquer  Sicily.  The  Sicilian  Parliament,  in   session  since March  25,   had  first  demanded  that  Sicily   s'hould  be   united  to Naples  by   a   personal  union  only;   then,   on  the   refusal  of   the King,   had   declared  the   throne  vacant  and   the   dynasty   excluded (April   13).   But   in   the   choice  of   the   new   King   of   Sicily   they had   hesitated  between  a   Tuscan  prince   who   was  supported  by   the Pope,   and  a   Piedmontese  prince;  they   had  chosen  the   Piedmontese,  the   Duke  of   Genoa,  second  son  of   King   Charles  Albert, but   the   King   had   refused  (August).  This  had   led   to   a   real   war. The  Neapolitan  army   landed  in   Sicily,   bombarded  Messina,  seized and   plundered  it   (September,  1848).   Ferdinand  was  nicknamed "   Re   Bomba  "   (King   Bomba).  The  French  and  English  governments imposed   an  armistice;  the   war  stopped   until  March, 1849.  In   1849   the   Sicilian  Parliament  rejected   Ferdinand's  ultimatum, decreed   that   all   citizens  between  18   and   30   years   of   age should  become  soldiers,  and   gave   the   command  to   a   Polish  Republican, Mieroslawski  ; but   he   had   almost  no  regular   troops. The  war  was  reduced  to   one   battle  in   the   streets  of   Catani;  the Neapolitan  soldiers  dared  not  advance,  and  the   barricade  was forced  by   a   Swiss  regiment.  The  Liberal  leaders  left   the   country, and   the   revolutionary  government  resigned  its   powers   into the   hands  of   the   municipal  council  of   Palermo;  the   Sicilian  cities surrendered.  Ferdinand  promised  them  a  constitution,  an  amnesty, a   viceroy,  a  national  guard,   and  the   recognition  of   the debt   of   the   revolutionary  government;  but   he   kept   none  of   his promises.  Sicily   found  herself  once  more  under  an  absolute government  (May,   1849).  In   tne   Kingdom  of   Naples   the   Absolutist restoration  was  already   accomplished;  the   King   had   dissolved the   Chamber  (March   13).   Then  began   political  prosecutions; of   114   deputies,  two-thirds  were  condemned  to   death, to   prison,   or   banishment.  Gladstone,  in   the   English   Parliament,

accused  the   government  of   treating  persons  condemned  for   political action   as   criminals.

In   the   centre  of   Italy,   the   Republican  party   profited  first   by the   indignation  against  the   King   of   Naples.  The   Pope   had   refused the   role   of   president   of   a   federation  of   Italian  princes  and leader  of   the   Democratic  party.   Already,  in   the   allocution  of April   29,   1848,   he   protested  against   the   accusation  of   having been  the   cause  of   the   Italian  revolutions;  he   declared  that   he   had always  exhorted  his   subjects  to   obedience  and   had   had   no   intention of   declaring  war  upon   Austria.  He   entered  into  conflict with  his   lay   ministry,  struck  out   from  his   speech   at   the   opening of   the   Chambers  a  passage  upon  nationalities,*  promulgated  a press   law   drawn  up   by   the   Dominicans  (June   4).   He   refused the   request  of   the   Chambers  to   separate  the   powers  of   head   of   the Church  and  of   sovereign  of   the   State  and  to   declare  his   ministers responsible  to   the   Chambers.  He   then   formed  a   new  ministry. Its   head,   Rossi,   formerly  ambassador  to   France,  tried  to resist  at   once  the   Republican  party   and   the   Church  restoration party.  The  day   of   the   reopening  of   the   houses  he   was  assassinated in   Rome  (November  5).   The  Republican  party  demanded a   constituent  assembly,  the   mob  advanced  on  the   Quirinal.  The  Pope   sent  word  to   the   European  ambassadors  that  he was  yielding  to   violence,  then  he   fled   to   the   Kingdom  of   Naples (November  24),   leaving  his   power  in   the   hands  of   a  number of   prelates   and   conservative  laymen;  but   these  were  not  allowed to  act.  The  Liberals  then  formed  a  provisional  government, which  tried  to   prevent  the   rupture;  but   the   Pope   threatened  to excommunicate  any  who  should  take  part   in   the   election.  The Constituent  Assembly,  elected  in   spite   of   this   threat,   declared  the Pope   stripped  of   his   temporal  power  and   proclaimed  the   Roman Republic  (February  9,   1849).  The  government  was  placed  in the   hands  of   a   triumvirate  with   Mazzini  at   the   head.  He   invited all   the   Italians  to   elect   deputies   to   a   general   Constituent  Assembly to   establish  Italian  unity.

In   Tuscany  the   government  had  forbidden  clubs  and  political meetings,  but   it   could  not  carry  out  this   order;   at   Leghorn  the Republicans  repulsed  the   soldiers  (September  2),   and   their  chief, the   poet   Guerazzi,  now  master  of   Leghorn,  obliged  the   Duke  to

*   "   God   has   here   below,  by   differences  of   tongue,  of   soil,   of   races,  and of   customs,  established  nations  that  they   might   live   their  own  lives  in   their own  way  .  .  .   and  God  has   given   to   Italy   all   these  ineffaceable  characteristics."

344  ITALY.

call   him   to   the   ministry.  The   Republican  party,   in   the   name of   national  sovereignty,  demanded  a   constituent  assembly  elected by   universal  suffrage.  The  Chamber,  elected  by   the   property owners,  frightened  by   the   Republicans  in   the   galleries,  voted  a constitituent  assembly  (January,  1849).  The   Grand  Duke  fled. A   band  of   Republicans  invaded  the   Chamber  and   gave   the   government to   a   triumvirate  (February  9);   then,   on   the   advice  of Mazzini,  they   proclaimed  the   Republic.

In   Lombardy  the  provisional  government  of   liberal  monarchists, in   order  to  cut  short  the   republican  agitation  which Mazzini  had  begun  at   Milan,  had   determined  upon   fusion  with the   Kingdom  of   Sardinia.  That  the   Republicans'  own  principle might   be   applied,   the   decision  was   left   to   the   sovereign  people. The  Lombards  were  called  upon  to   pronounce  by   universal  suffrage "   if   the   annexation  of   Lombardy  to   constitutional  Piedmont should  take  place   at  once  or   be   postponed."  There  were 561,000   for   immediate  annexation  against   681   opposed  (May   28, 1848).  In   Venetia  the   fusion  was  voted  by   an  assembly  of   notables, 127   against   6   (July   2).   All   northern  Italy   was  thus   united in   a   single   constitutional  kingdom.

The  Reaction. - As   in   1821  and  1831,   foreign   armies  effected the   restoration.  The   Austrian  army,   in   a   single   combat  (at   Custozza,   July   24),   put   to   flight   the   Sardinian  army,  and   reconquered all   of   Lombardy.  Radetzky,  invested  with  unlimited powers,  levied  a  special   tax  on  all   who  had   taken  part   in   the revolution  and  set  up   a  military  government.  Venetia  alone remained  a  republic,  and  the   assembly  gave  the   dictatorship  to Manin  under  the   form  of   a   triumvirate  (August  13,   1848).

The  Kingdom  of   Sardinia  had  simply  arranged  an  armistice with  Austria;  England  and  France  offered  their  mediation,  but they   could  not  agree  on   the   constitution  to   give   Lombardy.  In March,  1849,   the   King   of   Sardinia,  supported  by   the   Chamber, began  the   national  war  again;   this   was  at   the   time  when  Austria was   occupied   with   Hungary.  The   Sardinian  army   had   been increased  to   85,000   men,   but   they   were  untrained  an'd   demoralized. A   single   defeat  (Novara,  March  23)   made  resistance  impossible: Charles   Albert   abdicated  to   facilitate  peace.   His   son Victor  Emmanuel  secured  peace  by   paying  a  war  indemnity. Venice  surrendered  after  a   long   siege   (August  22).   Lombardy remained  until  1851   subject   to   summary  jurisdiction  (Standrecht). The   Austrian  general,  Haynau,  who  had   taken  Brescia  by   storm, was  nicknamed  the   "   hyena   of   Brescia  ";   he   was  even  reproached

with  having  had  women  beaten.  The  most  horrible  thing   to Italians  was  the   penalty  of   whipping,  which  the   Austrians  had retained  for   their  soldiers  and   now  applied   to   the   Italians.  The government  granted  an  amnesty,  but  excepted  from  it   86   notables, and   later   sequestered  the   estates  of   Lombards  who   had   fled to   Piedmont.

The  duchies  of   Modena  and  Parma,  which  had  joined  Piedmont, were  occupied  by   Austrians.  The  re-established  dukes restored  their  absolutist  government,  persecuted  the   Liberals  and clerical  partisans  of   national  unity,   and  concluded  a  customs union  with  Austria.

In   Tuscany  the   Liberals  tried  to   drive  out  the   Austrians  by forming,  at   Florence,  a  provisional  government,  and  recalling the   Grand  Duke;  the   Republican  party   kept   only   Leghorn.  But the   Austrian  army  occupied  Tuscany  and  remained  there  until 1859,   and   the   Grand  Duke,  under  the   pressure  of   the   Austrian government,  finally   (1852)   withdrew  the   Constitution  of   1848   and revived  censorship  of   the   press.   Tuscany  was  more  oppressed than  before  the   revolution.

Four  Catholic  powers,  France,  Spain,   Austria,  and   Naples,  offered the   aid   of   their   armies  to   the   Pope   against   the   Roman Republic.  The  Neapolitans,  who  approached  from  the  south, were  driven  back  by   the   Republican  forces;  Spain   sent  only   two ships.  The  Austrians  occupied  only   the  northern  part  of   the States  of   the -Church,  the   Romagna,  where  they   remained  until 1850.

It   was  the   French  expedition  that   undertook  to   win   back  the city   of   Rome.  The   head  of   the   Republic  (established  in   March), Mazzini,  and   the   most  popular  general,  Garibaldi,  were  both  from northern  Italy:   Mazzini  from  Genoa,  Garibaldi  from  Nice.  An army  of   volunteers  had   been  organized;  those  of   Garibaldi  wore red   shirts  (at   first   blue)   and   the   Calabrian  plumed   hat;   a   committee on   barricades  had  been  appointed.  The  French  government at   first   sent  only   a   small   army,   hoping   to   enter  Rome  without a   battle,   with   the   aid   of   the   Liberal  Monarchists;  their  object was  simply  to   re-establish  the   Pope   and  at   the   same  time  preserve the   liberal   institutions;  they   were  counting  on  a   Liberal proclamation  from  the  Pope,  which  they   did  not  get.   The French  army  attempted  a  surprise,  and  was  repulsed  by   the Romans.

The  fate   of   Rome  hung   on   the   struggle   between  political  parties in   France;  the   President  and   the   Catholic  Right   in   the   As-

346  ITALY.

sembly  decided  on   the   war   in   spite   of   the   Republican  party.   The Roman  expedition  ended  in   the  siege   and   capture  of   the   city (June   30,   1849).   The   Pope   granted  an  amnesty,  but   with   283 exceptions.  He  re-established  the   government  of   the   Cardinals, and  Cardinal  Antonelli,  now  secretary  of   state,  rejected  the   reforms proposed   by   France  as  contrary  to   the   papal   sovereignty. Nothing  was  done  beyond  creating  a  consulta  of   laymen  appointed by   the   Pope   and   absolutely  without  power.

The  Constitutional  Kingdom  of   Sardinia  (1849-58). - The   revolution of   1848   had  failed.  Nothing  remained  of   it   with  the people  but  memories,  miseries,  and  deceptions;  with  the   governments, an  even  greater  contempt  for   the   press,   liberal  ideas, and  the   bourgeoisie;  deficit  in   the   finances,  foreign  garrisons all   over  central  Italy   (the   Austrians  in   the   duchies  and   the   Romagna,  and  the   French  in   Rome).  The  national  tricolour  flag, once  adopted  by   all   the   states,  was  abandoned.  Italy   found  herself once  more,  as   in   1848,   parcelled   out  and   dependent  upon foreign  powers.

One  state  alone  avoided  the  restoration  and  issued  transformed from   the   crisis.  The   Kingdom  of   Sardinia  preserved  the liberal  Constitution  of   '48   and   the   national  tricolour  flag;   it   became the   centre  where  Italian  unity   was  prepared.  It   was  a sufficiently  commonplace  state,  with  a  population  of   less   than 5,000,000,  composed  of   four  separate  parts;  the   island  of   Sardinia, a   malarial  country,  poor,  mediaeval,  and  without  political life;   the   coast  of   Genoa,   a   country  of   sailors,   newly   admitted  to the   state,   ill   disposed  toward  the   dynasty,  and   the   centre  of   the democratic  republican  party;  Savoy,  a  rural  French  district, controlled  by   the   nobles  and  clergy;  Piedmont,  a  country  of rustics,  without  industrial  activity,  with   a   single   large   city,   Turin, the   residence  of   the   court.

The  society  was  aristocratic,  with  sharper  class  distinctions than  in   Italy.   The   nobles  held   aloof  from  -the   middle  class;   preserving the   traditions  of   military   life,   they   usually   became  officers. The  peasants  continued  to  obey   the   clergy.  The  bourgeoisie, mostly  of   slender  wealth,  remained  'dependent  upon  the   government. These   people   spoke   a   dialect  very   different  from  literary Italian,  Piedmontese,  considered  a  patois;  to  other  Italians,  uncultivated, coarse,   backward,  and   only   half   Italian.  But   they had  a  political  advantage  over  all   the   other  peoples  of   Italy: they   possessed  an   independent  national  dynasty  and   an  army  that could  fight.

Charles  Albert  of   Sardinia  had   been  hated  by   the   Liberals; they   could  not   forgive   him   for   deserting  them  in   1821  and   for having  preserved  the   absolutist  government;  even  in   1848   they remained  hostile  and  even  suspected  him  of   treason.  Now  the advocates  of   unity   were  all   Liberals;  to   make  Piedmont  the centre  of   the   national  movement,  it   must  first   be   reconciled  with liberal  opinion.  This  was  the   work  of   Victor  Emmanuel  and Cavour.

At  the  time  of   the   general  reaction  in   1849,   Victor  Emmanuel remained  faithful  to   the   liberal  system.  Austria  offered to   modify   the   conditions  of   peace   if   he   would  renounce  the   Constitutional Statute   of   1848:   he   refused.  He   abandoned  neither the   national  tricolour  flag   nor  the   liberty   of   the   press,  and   he gathered  Liberal  fugitives  from  other  countries.  His  kingdom became  the   sole   liberal  and   national  state  in   Italy.

The  Constitutional  Statute  of   1849   was  a   combination  of   the French  Charte  and  the   Belgian  Constitution.  It   established  a parliamentary  mechanism  composed  of   a  ministry  responsible to   the   Chambers,  a   Senate  of   life   members  appointed  by   the King   in   two  special   classes,  and   a   Chamber  of   Deputies  elected by   the   property  owners.  It   was  a   more  democratic  regime   than in   France  (the   tax  qualification  for   voting   was  40   francs  or  20 francs,  according  to   the   place),   but   less   liberal  than   in   Belgium. The  Statute  announced  neither  the   sovereignty  of   the   people   nor personal  rights;   it   was  simply   a   proclaimed  constitution,  without procedure  for   revision;  it   did   not  recognise  liberty   of   faith,   but declared  Catholicism  the  state  religion;  it   granted  no  salary   to deputies ; it   left   room   for   doubt  as   to   the   extent  of   the   ministerial responsibility.

In   fact   the   system   has   worked  after  the   model  of   the   English Parliament;  the   Statute  has   been  modified  often  (and   more  easily than  a  revisable  constitution)  by   means  of   laws  passed  in   the usual  form;  the   King   has  taken  only   those  ministers  that  are accepted  by   the   majority  in   the   House.  But   the   mass  of   electors has   remained  docile  to   the   government,  dissolution  being   usually a   sufficient  means  of   securing  a   majority  favourable  to   the   ministry which   the   King   supports.  The  King   thus  remains  the arbiter  between  parties,  the   true  director  of   political  life.  The system  really   is,   under  a   parliamentary  appearance,  the   personal government  of   the   King,   as   in   France  under  Louis  Philippe.

During  the  war  against  Austria  the  electors,  excited  by   the national  movement,  had  returned  a   democratic  majority  which

348  IT  At  Y.

had  obliged  the   King   to   take  a  ministry  under  Gioberti  and now  aspired  to  secure  unity   by   a   federation  of   the   Italian states.  After  the   defeat  of   1849,   tne   Chamber  was  not   willing to   vote  approval  of   the   peace.   Now  the   constitution  demanded that   the   treaty   with   Austria  should  be   ratified  by   the   Chamber. There  were  three  Chambers  elected  that  year   (January,  dissolved March  30;   July,   dissolved  November  20;  and   December).  The King   published  an  appeal   to   the   voters  an'd   secured  a   Chamber which  voted  the   peace   by   112  votes  against   17   (January,  1850).

Then,  in   order  to   apply   the   article  of   the   Statute  which  declared the   King   to   be   the   fountain  of   justice,   it   became  necessary to   abolish  the   Church  Courts.  The  government,  having  failed in   its   attempt  to   have   the   Holy   See   abolish  them  by   concordat, decided  to   have  the   Chambers  vote  the   famous  "   Siccardi  laws   " (Siccardi  was  minister  of   justice),   which  suppressed  the   right   of asylum  in   convents,  the   clerical  privilege  of   not   being   amenable to   lay   justice,   the   penalties   for   labour  on  ordinary   holy   days,   and forbade  the   acquisition  of   possessions  in   mortmain  without  the consent  of   the   state.  A   rupture  ensued  between  the   government and  the   higher   clergy;   the   Archbishop  of   Turin  forbade  obedience to   these   laws,   and   was  condemned  to   a   month's  imprisonment. One   of   the   ministers  died   without  absolution  and   the clergy   refused  to   bury   him;   his   funeral  was  made  the   occasion of   a   demonstration.

This  struggle  made  the   final  arrangement  of   parties.  There was  an  extreme  right,   absolutist  and  opposed  to  the   constitution, an   extreme  left,   democratic  (recruited  mainly   in   Genoa)   and hostile  to   the   dynasty;  between  the   two  the   great   constitutional dynastic  mass  divided  into  two  groups:  the   right,   the   Conservative party   supporting  the   constitution,  and   the   left   centre,   detached from   the   Democratic  party   and   now   become  a   part   of   the liberal  and   anti-clerical  bourgeoisie.

Cavour's  Policy. - In   this   constitutional  government,  where  the King,   first   of   all   a   hunter  and  an  army  officer,  took  little  interest in   politics,   there   was  a   minister,   Cavour,   who   controlled  the   state. Benzo  di   Cavour  was  a  gentleman  who  could  hardly  be   called Italian;  he   was  blonde,  with  a  white  skin,   and  spoke   almost nothing  but   French  and   the   Piedmontese  patois.  He   had   been first   an  artillery   officer,   but   was   discharged  for   having   approved the   revolution  of   1830,   and   retired  to   his   own  estates;  he   then spent   his   time   travelling  in   France,  where  he   frequented  Broglie's salon  and   adopted  the   liberal  doctrines  of   the   French  bourgeoisie,

and  in   Germany,  where  he   absorbed  ideas  of   economic  reforms. In   1847   he   was  one  of   the   founders  of   the   Risorgimento in   Turin,  a   liberal  monarchical  paper.  During  the   Revolution he   struggled  against  the   democratic  party  so  violently  as  to make  himself  unpopular.  But  during  this  reaction  he   defended the   constitution  and   the   liberty   of   the   press.   In   the   discussion of   Church  laws,   he   broke  loose  from  the   Conservative  party   and began  to   form  a  right   centre,  which  approached  the   left   centre directed  by   Ratazzi.  Cavour  first  entered  the   ministry  in   1850 as  a  special  minister  (agriculture,  commerce,  marine)  under Azeglio  (Conservative).  In   1852   he   left   the   Conservatives  and formed  the   Cavour-Ratazzi  ministry,  which  had  the   support  of the   two  centres  and   lasted  until  1859.

Cavour  henceforth  laboured  to  prepare  for   the   contest  with Austria  by   increasing  the   country's  forces  and  seeking  foreign allies.

To   increase  the   wealth  of   the   country,  he   attempted  by   means of   commercial  treaties  to   revive  Genoa's  shipping  trade,  and   to develop  the   exportation  of   agricultural  produce.  His  economic reforms  revived  the   struggle  with  the   clergy.  He   proposed  to place   a   tax  on   Church  estates,  to   secularize  the   lands  of   wornout  orders,  and   to   establish  a   Church  treasury  to   equalize  the salaries  of   priests.  He   did   not  touch  the   41   bishoprics  (i   for every  149,000  souls)   nor  the   secular  clergy;   but   his   plan   for   suppressing convents  was  enough   to   stamp   him   as  an  enemy  to   the Church.  The  Pope   threatened  the   government  with  excommunication; then,   as   Victor  Emmanuel  had  within  one  month  lost  his mother,  his   wife,   and   his   brother,  the   Pope   sent  him  a   letter representing  these  deaths  "as   a  warning  from  God.  The  King hesitated,  but   nevertheless  sanctioned  the   law   which  suppressed 334  convents  with  4280   monks  and  1200  nuns;  264   remained. The  army  under  the   direction  of   La   Marmora,  was  reorganized on   the   Prussian  model.

For   outside  agitation  Cavour  placed   himself  in   connection  with the   advocates  of   Italian  unity.   There  were  already  in   the   kingdom many   Italian  refugees,  mainly   Lombards.  Several  of   the Republicans  of   1848,   despairing  of   a   union  by   republic,  turned toward  the   House  of   Savoy.  The  most  noted  convert  was   Ma.nin,   the   former  dictator  of   Venice.  He   wrote  publicly  (in   the Siecle,   September  15,   1855)   that   his   motto  was   "   Independence and  unity,"  and,   addressing  himself  to  the   King   of   Sardinia: "   Make  Italy,   and   I   and   all   other   Republican  patriots   are   for   you

35°  ITALY.

and  with  you;   if   not,  not."  Other  patriots  joined   him.  In August,  1857,   they   founded  the   National  Union,  a   public   society in   Piedmont,  a   secret  society   in   the   absolutist  states.  It   won support  especially  among  cultivated  city   people,   and   especially  in northern  Italy   and  Sicily   (the   secretary  was  a   Sicilian,  La Farina  *).   The  Union  carried  on   its   work  by   pacific   propagandism  and  disapproved  of   conspiracies  and   insurrections.  It   was in   conflict  with   the   former  Republican  party,  with   Mazzini,  who founded  a   secret  society   in   Genoa  against   the   monarchy  and   incited trouble  in   Genoa,   Naples,   and   Leghorn.  The   Piedmont papers   began   to   attack  the   Austrian  government  openly;  a   subscription was   started  in   Italy   to   buy   cannon  for   the   fortress of   Alexandria  in   Piedmont,  another  for   a   monument  in   honour of   the   Italian  army.

Cavour  did   not   believe,  with   the   patriots   of   1848,   that   Italy   was strong  enough  to   act  alone ;   since  he   had   become  minister  of   foreign affairs   he   had   been   looking   for   alliances.  He   was  a   great admirer  of   the   English  Constitution,  and  did   not  forget   the former  friendly  relations  between  Piedmont  and   England;  but   he needed  an  ally   with  a  strong  army.  He   early   thought  of   Napoleon III.   To   please   him,   he   had   had   voted,   in   spite   of   the left,   the   law   forbidding  insults  to   foreign  sovereigns.  In   the Crimean  war  he   allied  Sardinia  with  France  and   England  against Russia,  although  the  Genoese  thereby  lost  their  trade  with Odessa;  he   sent   into   the   Crimea  a   Sardinian  army  at   the   expense of   the   state,   refusing   English   subsidies.  The  kingdom  did   not draw  any   direct  profit   from  this   war,   but   it   gave   Cavour  a   chance to   take   part   in   the   Congress   of   1856.   He   took   advantage  of   this opportunity  to   get   Napoleon  to   ask   him   for   a   report  on   the   condition of   Italy,   and   to   thank  him   immediately  in   the   name  of   all the   Italians.  He   took   advantage  of   it   at   the   end   of   the   Congress to   present  a   report  on   the   agitation  in   the   States  of   the   Church caused  by   the   Austrian  occupation.

His   success  hung   on   the   personal  will   of   Napoleon.  The   latter had   in   his   youth   sworn  to   work  for   Italian  unity.   It   seems  as   if he   was  prevailed  on   to   act   by   Orsini's  attempts  at   assassination, and   especially  by   the   letter  which  Orsini  had   written  him,   conjuring him   to   restore  the   freedom  of   Italy.   He   sent   his   physician

*   La   Farina  tells   that   he   was  in   secret  communication  with  Cavour; they   had   interviews  in   the   early   morning,  and  Cavour  said  to   him  :   "   Do what  you  can.  Before  the  world  I   shall  deny   you   as   Peter  denied  the Saviour."

to   invite  Cavour  to   a   personal  interview  at   Plombieres.  At   this interview  an  understanding  was  completed.  It   was  a   bargain: Napoleon  promised  to   deliver  the  whole  Lombardo-Venetian kingdom  as   far   as   the   Adriatic;  Cavour,  in   return,  promised  him Savoy   and   Nice.

Formation  of   the   Kingdom  of   Italy   (1859-60). - The  union  of Italy   was  accomplished  by   all   the   Italian  advocates  of   unity, royalists  and  republicans,  working  in   harmony  with  the   Piedmontese  government,  aided  by   a  great   European  power,  first France,  then  Prussia.  The  process  occupied  eleven  years  and was  made  in   five   successive  annexations:  Lombardy,  1859;   Tuscany, Modena  and   Parma,  Romagna,  January,  1860;   Kingdom of   Naples,   the   Marches,  and   Umbria,  at   the   end   of   1860;   Venetia,   1866;   Rome,  1870.   The   first   three  operations  formed  a   continuous series   which   ended   in   the   creation  of   the   Kingdom  of Italy.

War  against  Austria  had   been  decided  upon  at   Plombieres  ; but it   was  necessary  to   await  a   cause  for   declaring  it;   England,  which wished  peace,  proposed  a  congress;  Napoleon  consented  to   it. Cavour  became  desperate  and  already  talked  of   blowing  out   his brains.  But  Austria,  instead  of   agreeing  to   the   congress,  sent an  ultimatum  to   Sardinia.  War  was  declared.

This  was  not  a   war   between  states,   but   between  parties.  Austria represented  absolute  government,  Church  domination,  and temporal  power  of   the   Pope;   the   conservative  parties  and   the clergy   all   over   Europe   prayed   for   her   success  in   the   Revolution (they   combined  under  this   name  all   the   constitutional  and   national attempts);  even  in   France  the  ministers  and  the   salons  disapproved of   the   war.  The  Sardinian  government  represented  national unity   and   liberal   government;  it   had   on   its   side   all   Italian patriots,  Free  Masons,  and  even  Republicans,  and   in   Europe  all liberal  democratic  anti-clerical  parties.  To   leave  the   King   master, the   Chamber  of   Sardinia  conferred  on   him   the   dictatorship. The  National  Union  declared  itself  dissolved;  there  were  neither clubs  nor  newspapers.  Garibaldi  with  his   volunteers  attacked the   Austrian  flank,   in   conjunction  with  the   regular   army.   After the   battle  of   Magenta  the   Austrians  evacuated  the   whole  of   Lombardy; when   coming   back   to   take   it   again   they   were  stopped   at Solferino.  But  the  "Quadrilateral"  covered  Venetia;  Napoleon, seeing   his   army   hard   pressed   and   threatened  by   Prussia, which  was  mobilizing  her  troops,  decided  to  conclude  peace. Austria  gave  up  only   Lombardy,  which  was  annexed  to  the

352  ITALY.

Kingdom  of   Sardinia  without  a  plebiscite,  as   if   it   had   never ceased  to   be   a   part   of   it   since   1848.   It   was  a   cruel   deception  for the   Italians;  they   reproached  Napoleon  with   having   broken  the compact  made  at   Plombieres  (Italy   to   be   "   freed   as   far   as   the Adriatic  ").   Cavour  first   refused  peace;  then,   in   despair,   resigned.

But  during  the   war   Victor  Emmanuel  had   called  the   Italians to   arms.  At   his   call,   the   advocates  of   unity   had,   immediately after  the   departure  of   the   Austrian  soldiers,  formed  provisional governments  in   the  three  duchies  of   central  Italy   and   in   the pontifical  provinces  farthest  from  Rome,  the   Legations  (Ro~ magna).  The  movement  had  been  arranged  beforehand  with the   Sardinian  government;  these  provisional  governments  gave the   power  to   a   dictator,  a   member  of   the   National  Union,   sometimes a   Sardinian  office-holder.  In   Tuscany  the   two  parties, democratic  and   aristocratic,  united  and   demanded  the   abdication of   the   Grand  Duke  and   war  with  Austria;  the   Grand  Duke  refused and   went  away.   A   provisional  government  was   formed immediately  (April   27),   and  offered  the   dictatorship  to   Victor Emmanuel;  the  King   accepted  only   the   military  management, but  sent  an  agent  to  whom  the  government  was  intrusted. When  the  war  was  over,,  the   Sardinian  agent  went  home;  the Consulta  convoked  an  assembly  of   deputies  who  voted  the   expulsion of   the   dynasty   and   annexation  to   Sardinia  (August,  1859). The  dictators  of   Modena  and   Parma  had   the   inhabitants  vote   for annexation  to   Piedmont:  at   Modena  by   90,000  votes,  at   Parma by   63,000   (August,  1859).   In   the   Romagna  they   elected  a   constitutional convention,   which   declared  unanimously,  in   the   name of   the   people,   "   that   they   did   not   want  the   temporal   government of   the   Pope,"   then   "   that   they   did   want  annexation  to   the   Kingdom of   Sardinia  "   (September,  1859).

It   was   harder  to   make  the   European  powers  accept  this   "   revolution," and   they   were  really   the   arbiters  of   the   fate   of   Italy. Napoleon  and  the   Emperor  of   Austria  had   decided  together  that central  Italy   should  remain  divided  into   small  states,  united  simply in   a   confederation;  it   was  the   tradition  of   French  policy   to keep   Italy   divided  up   like   Germany;  in   Tuscany,  Napoleon  would have  liked  to   establish  his   cousin  Jerome.  Besides,  the   Pope protested  against  the   revolution  in   the   Romagna,  and   the   French government  did  not  dare  act  against  the  Pope.  For  eight months  central  Italy   lived  in   uncertainty,  at   the   mercy  of   diplomatic intrigues.  Meanwhile,  Modena,  Parma,  and   the   Romagna adopted  the   constitution  of   Sardinia,  suppressed  the  customs

duties  on  the   frontiers  toward  Sardinia,  handed  over  the   postoffices  to   Sardinian  employees,  and  formed  a  union  under  the name  of   the   royal   provinces  of   Emilia.  They   then  formed  a   military league   with   Tuscany.

The  Italians  were  planning  now  to   bring   Napoleon  face   to   face with  an  accomplished  fact;   they   kept   him  from  interfering  by treating  him  as  a   liberator,  and  imploring  his   aid   in   the   name of   his   own  principles,  nationality  and   the   right   of   universal  suffrage. Napoleon   wanted  to   settle  matters  through  a  congress. The  congress  was  called,  but   never  met,   as   the   Pope   would  not consent  to   it.   In   Piedmont  the   Republican  party,   irritated  with these  delays,   wished  to   begin   righting  again;   they   founded  a   society, the   Nasione  Armata,  which  should  revolutionize  Italy.   The coalition  of   the   centres,  which  had   been  governing  since  1852, broke  up;   the   right   centre  and   the   King   were  unwilling  to   act against  Napoleon.  Ratazzi  resigned;  Cavour  took  the   ministry (January  20,  1860)   and  persuaded  Napoleon  to  permit  the   annexation of   central  Italy,   for   the   price   set   at   Plombieres:  Savoy and  the   county  of   Nice.  They   avoided  the   formality  of   a   treaty of   cession;  all   these  annexations  were  simply   put   to   a   vote  by universal  suffrage  (March,  1860)  and  carried  almost  unanimously. The   new  provinces  then   elected  their   delegates  to   the Chamber  at   Turin,  which  took  the   name  of   the   National  Parliament.

The  royalists  had  gained  central  Italy,   the   republicans  assumed control  of   the   south.

The  government  of   Naples  was  defended  mainly   by   Swiss  regiments. Now,   in   1859,   Perugia   had   revolted  against   the   Pope, and  had  been  taken  by   a   Swiss  regiment;  the   irritation  of   the patriots  had   therefore  been  directed  against  the   Swiss  mercenaries established  in   Italian  cities,   which,   menaced  in   their  commerce, remonstrated  with  the   Swiss  federal  government.  The Swiss  government  ordered  the.   withdrawal  of   the   Swiss  national emblems  from  the  flags   of   the   mercenaries.  The  Swiss  regiments in   the   service  of   Naples   mutinied,  refusing  to   serve  under any  other  flag,   and   the   majority  of   the   soldiers  withdrew.  So the   King   of   Naples   was   left   with  almost  none  but   Neapolitan soldiers,  who  had  little  interest  in   defending  him.  Victor  Emmanuel offered   him   an  alliance  and   tried   to   make  him   grant   a constitution  (1859);  Ferdinand  refused  (March,  1860).  Revolutionary committees  were   formed  in   Sicily,   and   insurrection  began, supported  by   the   Italians  of   the   north. 23

23

354  ITAL  Y-

Garibaldi,  secretly  aided  by   the   Sardinian  government,*  landed in   Sicily   with  a   thousand  volunteers,  mainly  Lombards  (the famous   'Marsala  Thousand).  A   short  combat  (Calatafimi,  May 17),   a   night   march  by   the   Garibaldians  on   Palermo  (May   26),   an armistice  (May   30),   and   the   Neapolitan  army  retired  in   disorder. Garibaldi,  although  master  of   Sicily,   prepared  to   return  to   the continent.  Ferdinand  asked  aid   of   Napoleon,  who   replied:  "   The Italians  are  shrewd,  they   know  very  well   that   after   having   shed the   blood  of   my   children  in   the   cause  of   their   nationality,  I   can never  fire   a   cannon  in   opposition  to   it."   Then  Ferdinand  determined to   re-establish  the   Constitution  of   '48   and   the   tricolour flag,   to   take   a   liberal  ministry   and   convoke  the   Chambers.  But he   no   longer   inspired  confidence.  He   felt   himself  abandoned, and  when  Garibaldi's  army   invaded  the   Kingdom  of   Naples,  he dared  not  resist,   and   fled   to   Gaeta.  He   wanted  to   take   his   fleet, but  the   Neapolitan  officers  had  had  their  boilers  emptied  and their  helms  put   out  of   order,   so   the   fleet   remained.  Garibaldi was  received  in   triumph  at   Naples.  There  remained  now  to   the King   but   two  places   of   refuge,   Capua   and   Gaeta,   and   these  were taken  later.

The  Garibaldians  next  invaded  the   States  of   the   Church.  The Pope,   to   replace   his   Swiss   mercenaries,  had   enrolled  a   small  army of   volunteers  (about   20,000  men),   mainly   foreigners - Austrians, Irish,  Belgians,  and   French,  under  a   French  general,  Lamoriciere;   in   addition  to   these,   Rome  had,   since  1849,   retained  its French  garrison.  The  war  began   between  the   Italian  Republicans and   the   Pope's   Catholic  army.   Cavour  determined  to   incans

*   Garibaldi,  after  the   war,   had   been  appointed  general  in   Tuscany,  then charged  by   Victor  Emmanuel  with  the  formation  of   the   national  guard  in Lombardy.  Dissatisfied  with  the  Sardinian  government,  which  had  prevented him   while  in   Tuscany  from  attacking  the   States  of   the   Church (November,  1859)  ; dissatisfied  with  the   pacific   policy   of   the   National  Union (he   resigned  his   office  of   honorary  president  in   December,  1859);   still   more dissatisfied  with  the   cession  of   Nice,   his   native  home,  he   had   resigned.  It was  said  that  he   was  urged   against  Sicily   by   Cavour,  who  had  written  to him:  "   Nice  or   Sicily."  The  letter  is   disputed.  It   was  said  that  the Sardinian  government  sent  to   Garibaldi  the  guns   from  the  arsenal  of Modena,  furnished  him  money,  and  ordered  the   governor  of   Genoa  to   close his   eyes   to   his   preparations.  When  the  expedition  was  fairly   started, Cavour  wrote  officially  to   the   European  powers,  expressing  his   regret,  but Admiral  Persano,  commander  of   the  fleet,  says  that  he  received  from Cavour  a  note  to   this  effect  :   "   Try   to   place   yourself  between  Garibaldi and  the  Neapolitan  cruisers;  I   hope   you  understand  me."  Persano  is said  to   have  replied:  "   My   lord,   I   believe  I   do   understand  you.   If   there is   need,   send   me   to   the   fortress  prison   of   Fenestrella."

terfere  and   called  upon   the   pontifical  government  to   disband  its foreign  soldiers,  "   who  are  an   insult  to   national  feeling   and   prevent the   people   from  expressing  their  wishes."  To   Napoleon he   wrote:  "We  are   forced  to   take  action."  Napoleon  washed his   hands  of   the   whole  affair.*  The  Piedmontese  army  rapidly occupied  the   provinces  of   the   Marches  and   Umbria.  The   Pope's little   army,  while  retreating  to   Ancona,  was  checked  and  scattered (Castelfidardo,  September  18);   the   rest  were  taken  at   Ancona. The   agents   of   the   Sardinian  government  had   a   vote  taken by   universal  suffrage  on   the   question  of   annexation  to   the   constitutional monarchy   of   Victor  Emmanuel  (November,  1860). The  vote  was  almost  unanimous  in   favour  of   the   annexation. cona.

In   the   country  conquered  by   the   Republicans  there  was  a heavy  struggle  (August-October,  1860).  Garibaldi,  "   dictator  of Sicily   "   and   later   "   dictator  of   the   two   Sicilies,"  obeyed   the   Republican party,   under   the   direction  of   the   Sicilian,  Crispi;   he refused  annexation  to   the   Kingdom  of   Italy.   The  liberal  monarchists, directed   by   the   pro-dictators  of   Sicily   and   Naples   (Depretis,   Pallavicino),  insisted  upon  annexation.  The  people  of Naples  then  made  their  demonstration  of   "   yes's."  They   showed their  wishes  by   placing  in   their  hats,   their  windows,  and   their doors  a   paper   bearing  the   word  si   (yes).   Garibaldi  at   last   decided to   put   the   question  of   annexation  to   vote.  It   was  voted in   Naples   by   1,302,074  votes  against   10,132;   in   Sicily   by   432,053 votes  against   667.

The  Parliament,  composed  of   413   deputies  and  214  senators, proclaimed  Victor  Emmanuel  King   of   Italy,   "   King   by   the   grace of   God   and   by   act   of   the   people   "   (February-March,  1861).   His kingdom  had  increased  from  5,000,000  to   22,000,000  souls.

The  Roman  Question  (1860-66), - The  Kingdom  of   Italy   still lacked  Venetia  and  the  province  of   Rome.  The  Italians  were not  strong  enough  to   take  Venetia  from  the   Austrians,  nor   Rome from  the   defenders  of   the   Pope.   The  process  of   union  stopped, and  Italian  politics  became  absorbed  with  the   Roman  question.

This  question  had   been  before  them  since  1859,   when  the   Pope's subjects  in   the  Romagna  had  rejected  the  temporal  power. What  should  be   the   fate   of   the   States  of   the   Church?  Four  parties were  organized,  each   with   a   solution.

*   Two  messengers  are  said  to   have  carried  a   letter  from  Victor  Emmanuel to   Napoleon,  at   Chambery  ;   according  to   one  of   them,   Cialdini, Napoleon  replied  :   "   Good  luck  and  act  promptly."  This  reply   has   taken the   legendary  form:  "   Act,   but   act  quickly."

356  ITAL  Y.

1.   The   Pope   and   his   minister  Antonelli  declared  themselves unable  to   renounce  the   temporal  power  over  any  of   the   States   of the   Church  ; the   Pope   regarded  himself  as   bound  by   his   oath   at accession  to   hand  them  over  intact  to   his   successor.     He   therefore excommunicated  his   rebellious  subjects,  also   the   Sardinian King   and   government  for   having  agreed   to   the   annexation.     He refused  to   recognise  the   Kingdom  of   Italy,   " a   creation  of   revolution."    His   general,   Lamoriciere,  said   to   his   soldiers  : "   Europe is   threatened  to-day   by   revolution  as  she   once  was   by   Islam,   and to-day   as   then   the   cause  of   the   papacy  and   of   civilization  is   that of   the   liberty   of   the   world."     He   wrote:  "   Everywhere  that   revolution shows   the   tip   of   its   ear  or   its   nose,   it   must   be   struck   down like   a   mad   dog."

2.   The   Italian  Republican  party   was  really   preparing  for   revolution; Garibaldi  and   Mazzini  demanded  open  war  to   deliver  the papal   subjects  from  the   "   tyranny  of   priests."     They   wished  to employ  volunteers  as   they   had   done  against   the   King   of   Naples.

Between  these  two  extreme  parties,  pontifical  restoration  and Republican  revolution,  two  parties  were  seeking  an   intermediate solution.

3.   Napoleon  III.   had   to   take   care  not  to   irritate  the   Catholic party   too  much,   as   it   was  very   powerful   in   France;  he   would  have preferred  not  to   touch  the   temporal  power ; he   asked  only   a   constitution given   by   the   Pope   as   in   1848.      After   the   insurrection  in the   Romagna,  he   advised  the   Pope   to   sacrifice  a  part   of   the States  of   the   Church  in   order  to   retain  the   rest.    The   anonymous pamphlet  on   "   The   Pope   and   the   Congress,"  which  he   got   published in   December,  1859,   showed  that  restoration  in   the   Romagna was   out   of   the   question  :   the   Pope   needs  a   temporal  power in   order  to   exercise  his   spiritual   power   freely,   but   he   cannot  govern a   state   ot   any   size;   the   Catholic  powers  should  guarantee him  only   Rome  and   the   patrimony  of   St.   Peter.     The  Pope   denounced this   pamphlet   as   "   a   monument  of   hypocrisy  "   and   refused to   take  part   in   the   congress  if   the   suggestion  were  not discountenanced.     Napoleon  also  let   the   Pope   lose   the   Marches and   Umbria,  and   in   a   new  pamphlet  had   it   said   that   Italy   and the   Pope   must  eventually  reconcile  themselves;  meanwhile,  he maintained  the   French  garrison  in   Rome  to  preserve  the   temporal power   in   the   interests  of   religion.

4.   The   Italian  government  found  itself  in   a   false   position,  not wishing  to   break  with  the   Pope,   the   head  of   the   Catholics,  not being   able   to   encourage  the   revolutionists  openly   for   fear  of

Europe,  nor  to   attack  Rome  for   fear   of   France,  and   not   daring either  to   fight   the   revolutionists  or   to   abandon  Rome  for   fear   of popular  opinion  at   home.  The  King   was  a  good   Catholic  and continued  to   address  the   Pope   in   respectful  terms.  Cavour  declared publicly   before  the   Chamber  that   the   question  must  be left   in   suspense  (March  28,   1861):   "Rome  must  be   the   capital of   Italy.   Without  Rome  for   her   capital   Italy   cannot  be   definitely constituted."  But  he   added  that  two  conditions  were  necessary: harmony  with  France  and   the   maintenance  of   the   Pope's   spiritual sovereignty.  His  motto  was :   "   A   free   Church  in   a   free   state/' that   is   to   say,   the   clergy   governing  the   faithful  in   spiritual   affairs without  intervention  from  the   state.  The   Chamber  passed   a   resolution to   the   same  effect.

Then  began  a  period  of   waiting  and  senseless  intrigue.  The Catholic  party   did   not  resign   itself  to   the   spoliation  of   the   Pope, nor  did   the   national  parties  give   up   hope   of   Rome.  But  the decision  depended  upon  the  will  of   foreign  powers,  especially France.  Garibaldi  tried  to  repeat   his   expedition  of   1860;   the Ratazzi  ministry  let   him  land  in   Sicily,   but   afterward  stopped him  at   Aspromonte  in   Calabria;  they   then  declared  themselves unable  to   answer  for   order  in   Italy   if   the   government  was   hindered from   giving   the   nation  its   capital   (1862).   But   the   result was  to   drive  Napoleon  to   the   side  of   the   Pope's   party,  and   to compel  the   Ratazzi  ministry  to   resign.

The  Italian  government  then  decided  to   postpone  the   solution; it   offered  Napoleon  to   transfer  its   capital   to   Florence  and   to   take the   role   of   defender  of   the   Pope;   this   was   Cavour's  plan.   Napoleon agreed   to   it   in   order   to   get   rid   of   the   conflicts  between his   French  generals  and  the   court  of   Rome.  This  had   as  outcome the   September  Convention  of   1864.   Italy   promised  to   stop her   attacks  on   the   Pope's   territory,  to   defend  it   from  all   outside attacks,  and   to 'let   the   Pope   enroll  an  army  of   volunteers.  France promised  to   withdraw  her   troops   in   two  years.   The   Italian  government left   Turin  and  transferred  itself  to   Florence;  the   French army   finally   evacuated  Rome  in   1866.  The  solution  of   the   Roman question   was  postponed. man

Annexation  of   Venetia  and  Rome  (1866-70). - As   usual,  the solution  came  from  outside.  The  Prussian  government  needed Italy   to   help   it   in   its   war  against   Austria.  It   had   been   making overtures  since  1862;   but   the   two  governments  lacked  confidence in   one  another,  each  suspecting  that  the   other  wanted  to   make use  of   its   help   to   secure  more   favourable  conditions  from   Austria.

35  8  ITALY.

Italy   hoped   to   gain   Venetia  without  fighting,  in   return  for   a money  compensation,  or  with  Napoleon's  aid,   in   exchange  for Roumania.  At   last   Prussia  and   Italy   concluded,  with   Napoleon's consent,  an  offensive  and   defensive  alliance  for   three   months  only (April,   1866).   The  Italian  army  attacked  the   Quadrilateral  and was  stopped  at   Custozza.  It   had  begun  once  more  to   invade Venetia,  when  the   Italian  fleet  was   half   destroyed  at   Lissa.  It was  the  Prussians'  victory  at   Sadowa  that  decided  Austria  in favour  of   peace.   She   accepted  Napoleon's  mediation,  granting him  Venetia,  which  he   gave   to   Italy,   on  condition  that   the   annexation was   approved   by   universal  suffrage.  (The   vote  was carried  almost  unanimously.)

Rome  now  remained  defended  only   by   the   Papal   volunteers. Garibaldi,  for   the   third  time,   taking   advantage  of   a   Ratazzi  ministry, attacked  the   Roman  territory.  The  Italian  government had  vainly   implored  Napoleon  to   intrust  to   it   alone  the   protection of   the   Pope.  Napoleon  had  little  faith  in   Italian  intervention, and   sent   a   French  expedition  which  accompanied  the   papal troops  against   Garibaldi.  The  famous  battle  of   Mentana  ensued; the   Garibaldians  were  killed  or  taken  prisoners  under  the   very eyes  of   the   Italian  army,  which  had   arrived  on  papal   territory  and was  obliged  to   remain  neutral  (November  3,   1867).  The  French used  the   new   Chassepot  gun   for   the   first   time,   and   the   French general  telegraphed:  "The  Chassepots  have  worked  splendidly." This  message  rankled  in   Italian  minds  as  an   insult.  In   Paris, the   head   of   the   ministry,   Rouher,  formally   declared  to   the   Chamber: "   Italy   will   not  enter  Rome.  No,   never!  "   A   French  garrison was   left   in   Rome   (December  5).   The   Pope   then   felt   safe in   summoning  the  ecumenical  council  of   the  Vatican  for December,  1869.

Once  more  the   solution  came  from  abroad.  The  war  between France  and  Germany  robbed  the  Pope   of   his   defender.  After the   first   French  defeats,  the   Emperor's  government  recalled  the French  troops  from  Rome  (August,  1870).  After  Sedan,  the Italian  army  invaded  the  papal  territory  and  arrived  before Rome.  Pius  IX.   declared  that   he   would  yield   only   to   force,   and waited  until   a   breach  was  made  in   the   wall   before  he   ordered  his troops  to   retire  (September  20).   The  Italians  occupied  Rome without  a   battle.  The   question  of   annexation  to   the   Kingdom of   Italy   was  submitted  to   universal  suffrage,  and  was  voted  by 130,000  against  1500.

The   Kingdom  of   Italy   was   finally   constituted  under  the   na-

tional  dynasty  of   Piedmont,  through  the   agreement  of   the   two national  parties,  republicans  and  constitutionalists,  but  chiefly through  the   aid   of   two   foreign   powers,   France  and   Prussia.

Formation  of   Parties  and   Internal  Difficulties  (1861-70).- The sudden  creation  of   the   Kingdom  of   Italy   had   upset  the   conditions of   public   life.  The   constitution  of   the   Kingdom  of   Sardinia having  been  extended  to   the   new  provinces,  it   was  necessary  to adjust  anew  the  administrative  system,  the   relations  with  the Church,  the   finances,  and   the   army,  and   new  parties   had   formed.

The  extreme  parties,  absolutist  and  republican,  had  been greatly   weakened  by   the   success  of   the   constitutional  monarchy; they   had   almost  no  representation  in   the   .Chamber.  The  Pope had  given   the   Catholics  the   watchword  Neither  electors  nor  members, and   so   the   Catholic  party   had   almost  disappeared.  The   republicans had   taken  the   form  of   a   radical  party   with   a   small  membership. The   Chamber  was  therefore  composed  almost  entirely of   the   two  constitutional  parties,  the   right   (Minghetti  and   Ricasoli)   and   left   centre  (Ratazzi).  Cavour  had   died   in   1861. bership.

The  ministry  alternated  between  these  two  parties,  chiefly   for reasons  of   foreign  policy.  Ratazzi,  who  had  succeeded  to  the ministry  as   Napoleon's  friend  (1862),   fell   before  the   protestations of   the   French  government  after  Aspromonte;  he   foundered  on the   same  rock  again   in   1867,   after  Mentana.

The  groups  formed  chiefly  on   local  lines.  The  Piedmontese (the   former  kingdom),  supported  by   the   deputies  of   central  Italy, were  in   control  the   greater  part   of   the   time;   the   deputies  from the   south,   with   a   part   of   the   Lombards,  opposed  them - usually in   the   guise   of   a   radical  party.

The  first   matter  taken  up   was  that   of   organizing  the   administration. Minghetti   proposed  to   give   a   degree   of   autonomy  to the   provinces.  The  great  majority  preferred  the   centralizing  system used   in   France,   with   prefects   and   mayors  appointed  by   the central  government;  they   divided  the   kingdom  into  59   provinces, corresponding  not  to  the   old   historic  provinces,  but   to   departments.* They   hoped   thus   to   strengthen  the   unity   which  was threatened  by   the   particularist  spirit.   They   feared  especially  to arouse  a   feeling   of   jealousy   in   other  cities  in   choosing  one  to   be the   capital   of   a   whole  province.

In   the   Kingdom  of   Naples,  the  brigands  and  idle  mountaineers, acting   in   the   name  of   King   Ferdinand  and   aided  by

*   There  are  69   since  the   annexation  of   Rome  and  Venetia  ;   they   bear the   names  of   cities.

360  ITALY.

the   absolutists,  terrorized  the   inhabitants,  forbade  them  to   pay taxes,  and   kidnapped  or  murdered  all   liberals.  The   Italian  army for   several  years  waged  a  veritable  war  against  them  in   the mountain  districts.  But  it   seems  that   they   did   not  succeed  in destroying  either  the   Camorra  in   Naples  or   the   Mafia  in   Sicily, secret  societies  of   brigands  who  preyed   on   the   inhabitants  and made  them  pay   tribute  under  pain   of   robbery  or  assassination.

Church  affairs  were  in   an   inextricable  tangle.  The  right, which  ordinarily  was   in   control,  was   formed  of   Catholic  liberals, faithful  to   Cavour's  program  :   "   A   free   Church  in   a   free   state." They   freely   renounced  the   powers  of   the   former  governments over  the   bishops  in   Church  matters,  and   would  even  leave  the Pope   the   right   of   naming   the   bishops.  They   wanted  an  understanding with   the   Holy   See   to   reorganize  the   Church  in   the   new provinces  where  the   clergy   were  too  numerous.  But   the   Pope, refusing  to   recognise  the   new  kingdom,  made  it   impossible  to conclude  a   new  regulation  and   even  to   transact  ordinary  affairs ; the   bishoprics  therefore  remained  vacant,  the   Pope   appointing bishops  who  refused  to   be   installed  by   the   government.  They had   hoped   to   settle  all   this   in   1866;   the   negotiation  failed   because the   Pope   would  not  recognise  any  right   of   the   state,  and   the question  of   the   appointment  of   bishops  remained  unsettled.

The  government  then  resigned  itself  to   carrying  on   the   work of   reform  alone ; it   did   not   interfere  with   the   bishops,   but   adopted a   fiscal   measure.  It   suppressed  the   convents  and   livings   which, having  no  cure  of   souls,   were  regarded  as  useless.  It   declared their  lands  state  property.  The  seminaries  were  reduced  from 288   to   21   (1867).   The   secularized  lands  were  sold   for   the   benefit of   the   state,   which  in   exchange  charged   itself   with   the   support  of the   clergy.

The  Italian  army  was  still   the   former  Piedmontese  army,  with Italian  recruits  added  to   it.   The   same  system  was  retained  as   to active  army  and   reserve.  Local  military  bodies,  each  recruited  in its   own  region,   were  objected  to   as   dangerous  to   unity.   The army  was  regarded  as  a   school  for   national  sentiment  where  soldiers of   all   provinces  must  learn  to   regard   each  other  as   fellowcountrymen;  it   was  also  a   primary  school  for   raw  recruits  who enlisted  without  knowing  how  to   read  (64   per   cent,  in   1866).

Of   these  difficulties  the   greatest  was  the   organization  of   the finances.  The  army,  maintained  at  a   high   effective  force  to   be always  ready   for   the   next  war,  and  a  newly   created  navy,  entailed an   expenditure  disproportionate  to   the   wealth  of   the   coun-

try.   The   following  table,   taken  from  a   report  published  in   1863,* shows  the   difference  between  the   budgets  of   the   separate  states  in 1859   and   the   budget   of   the   united  kingdom  in   1863:

|   1863 | Receipts.   | Receipts.      | Deficit. 5o,ooo,ooofr.   | Debt. 2,ooo,ooo,ooofr.   |
|--------|-------------|----------------|--------------------------|--------------------------|
|   1863 | ....        | 575,ooo,ooofr. | Deficit. 5o,ooo,ooofr.   | Debt. 2,ooo,ooo,ooofr.   |
|   1859 | ....        | 900,000,000    | 350,000,000              | 4,000,000,000            |

In   1864   the   treasury  was  empty,  and   the   city   of   Brescia  set   the patriotic  example  of   paying  its   taxes  in   advance.  Half  of   the total  receipts  was  absorbed  by   the   interest  on   the   debt;   the   annual deficit   was  covered  only   by   new   loans.

The   Consorteria  (1861-76).- For  fifteen  years   (1861-76)  Italy's domestic  policy  was  subordinated  to  military  and  economic necessities.  This  was  the   period   of   business  ministries,  without distinct  political  character.  The  chief  ministers  were  from  the constitutional  right,   Italians  of   the   north  and   centre:  Minghetti was  a   Piedmontese,  Sella  a   Lombard,  Ricasoli  a   Tuscan,  Fanti a   native  of   Romagna.  They   were  called  the   Consorteria  (club). In   various  combinations  they   held  the   ministry  most  of   the   time; Ratazzi  twice  succeeded  in   dislodging  them  by   forming  a coalition  of   the   left   centre,  the   radicals  and   the   discontented  Piedmontese, but   his   ministries  were  short  (March-October,  1862; April-October,  1867).  The  Piedmontese  were  displeased  at losing   the   capital,   transferred  from  Turin  to   Florence,  and   for several  years   formed  a  party   (the   permanent s),   but   in   1869   they made  a  reconciliation  with  a  ministry  of   the   right   (MenabreaMinghetti).

The  Consorteria  governed  during  the   critical  period   of   the   deficit and   the   sharp   conflict  with   the   Pope.   Finally   Sella,   minister of   finance,  persuaded  the  Chamber  to  adopt  an   heroic measure.  The  deficit  had  reached  63O,ooo,ooo.f

In   1868  they   re-established  the   grist   tax,  which  had  been abolished  in   1859   as  too  unpopular.  They   also  created  new taxes  to   the   amount  of   about  150,000,000.  The  sale   of   secularized lands   procured  over  500,000,000  (from   1868  to   1876).  In 1873   they   made  banknotes  legal   tender.

*   Plebano  and  Musso,  "   The  Finances  of   the   Kingdom  of   Italy,"   1863. These  figures  are  only   approximate.

| According  to   Sella's  calculations,  the  total  expenditure  from  1861 to  1870   had  been  10,499,000,000;  the  receipts  10,054,000,000,  of   which 3,607,000,000  were  special  receipts,  mainly  loans.  To   borrow  2,691,000,000 the   state  had   contracted  a   nominal  debt  of   3,852,000,000,  and  paid   1,219,000,000  as   interest.

362  ITALY.

The  Consorteria  had  also  the   task  of   adjusting  relations  with the   Pope   after   the   taking   of   Rome.  The   Italian  government  was transferred  to   Rome,  as   the   definite  capital   of   the   kingdom;  the King  established  himself  in   the   Quirinal  Palace.  The   Pope's situation  was  settled  by   the   law   of   guarantees  (1871).   The   Pope, recognised  as  an   independent  sovereign,  preserved,  in   his   Palace of   the   Vatican,  his   sovereign  powers,  right   to   receive  diplomatic agents,   jurisdiction,  guard,   and   archives;  Italy   engaged  to   grant him  a   civil   list   of   three   and   a   quarter   millions.  In   exchange  for his   temporal  power,  the   state  gave  up   to   him   its   powers  over  the Italian  clergy,   recognised  his   right   to   appoint   the   bishops,   abolished the   bishops'   oath   to   the   King,   the   placet   and   the   exequatur. But   Pius   IX.   nevertheless  excommunicated  the   invaders,  and   declared himself   "morally   a   prisoner,"   making   a   rule   for   himself never  to   leave  the   Vatican  again;   he   refused  to   enter  into   relations with   the   Italian   government,  and   even  to   receive  the   civil list.  The  ministry,  which  had   never  ceased  to   avow  its   respect for   the   Holy   Father,  found  itself,   face   to   face   with   Europe   and the   Italians,  in   a   very   delicate  situation.

As   the   Pope   persisted  in   his   refusal  to   recognise  the   Kingdom of   Italy,   the   occupation  of   Rome  remained  an  actual  possession, although   not   recognised  by   the   Catholics  and   exposed  to the   chance  of   a   restoration.  The   Catholic  party,  especially  -in France,  protested  against  the   captivity  of   the   Holy   Father  and talked  of   re-establishing  the   temporal  power   by   force  of   arms, as   in   1849.   From  the  time  that  the  Catholic  monarchists assumed  control  in   France  in   1873   until  the   check  of   May   16 (1877),   the   Italian  government  thought  itself  threatened  with  a French  expedition.  Now  the  "   Consorteria  "   had.  been  the French  party;   it   had   made  the   alliance  with  Napoleon  and  had been  attacked  by   the   republicans  and   radicals;  in   1870,   its   sympathies were  with   France.  In   1871,   relations  with   the   French government  became  so  cool  that  the   ministry  decided  to   increase the   army  to   resist,   as   it   said,   "   the   clerical  party,   which  might make  itself  seem  the   national  party   in   other  countries."

The   Pope's   attitude  made  it   impossible  to   settle  by   a   concordat the   question  of   the   Roman  convents,  or   to   make  regular   provision for   the   bishoprics  which  had   become  vacant  (89   in   1871). The   government  secularized  the   Roman  convents  by   a   law,   and their   possessions  were  turned  over  to  the   treasury  (1873).  It proposed  a   law   to   make  civil   marriage  compulsory  (1873),  but postponed  the   discussion  in   order  not  to   aggravate  the   situation.

The  Pope   continued  to   fill   vacant  bishoprics,  and  the   bishops entered  upon  their  office  without  asking   the   consent  of   the   government, confining   themselves  to   publishing  the   bull   of   nomination in   the   sacristy;  and  the   government  contented  itself  with this.  The  Catholic  party  tried  to   regain   its   position  in   political life;   a   congress  of   Catholic  societies  (1874)   determined  to   vote everywhere  at  the  communal  elections  in   order  to  establish municipalities  favourable  to   Christian  schools;  the   Catholics  had not  yet   voted  except  at   Naples  (1872);   they   failed  at   first,   but succeeded  in   a   number  of   cities  in   1875.

It   was  also   a   ministry   of   the   right   that   carried  the   law   for   compulsory military   service  like   that   of   Prussia,   with   a   one-year  volunteer system,

The  policy  of   the   ministry  of   the   right   remained  defensive; Minghetti  summed  up   his   program  in   two  points :   balanced  budget, independent  Church.

Accession  of   the   Left   (1876). - Little  by   little   the   proportion  of parties  in   the   Chamber  had  changed.  The  left  was  growing. This  party,  called  radical,  had  allied  itself  to  royalty;  at   the twenty-fifth  anniversary  of   the   King's   accession  (1874)   the   party declared  that   "   so   far   as   attachment  to   the   King   and   the   House  of Savoy   are  concerned,  the   Left  is   not  a   hair's  breadth  behind  the Right."  At   the   election  of   1874   there  were  returned  only   288 members  for   the   government  and  220  for   the   opposition.  For the   first   time   party   divisions  were  entirely   geographical  :   northern Italy   voted  for   the   right   and   the   ministry,  southern  Italy   for   the left.

The  Tuscans,  who  had  vainly   borne  the   expense  of   installing the   government  in   Florence,  where  it   had  remained  only   six years,   formed  a   party   and   joined   the   left;   the   ministry   was  put   in minority  on  the  grist   tax  by   a  vote  of   242  against  181.  A Sicilian,  Depretis,  formerly  Garibaldi's  agent,   formed  the   first ministry  of   the   left,   in   which  southern  Italians  predominated (March,  1876).  it   changed  a   large   number  of   prefects,  then  obtained a   dissolution.  The  Chamber  was  in   large   part   new  men; only   332   of   the   508   deputies  retained  their  seats.  Sicily   and Naples,  instead  of   149   deputies  of   the   Left  against  45   of   the Right,   returned  184   of   the   Left.  There  were  385   members  for the   government,  94   for   the   Right,   and   20   Republicans.  Since 1876   the  Right,  properly  speaking,  has  never  regained  the majority.

To   understand  the  political  contests  of   the   last   twenty  years

364  ITALY.

in   Italy,   it   is   necessary  to   study   the   practical   conditions  of   electoral and   parliamentary  life.   Under  the   Constitution  of   1848   the right   of   voting   had   been  confined  to   property  owners  paying   a tax  of   40   francs;  now   in   the   greater  part   of   Italy   the   land   belonged to   large   landholders,  and   the   peasants  were  only   tenants; the   number  of   voters  scarcely  exceeded  600,000;  even  after  the reform  of   1882  it   did   not  exceed  2,000,000.  Even  in   this   restricted voting   body,   the   great   majority   remained  indifferent  to politics;  the   number  of   votes  is   rarely   a   half   of   the   registered names,  and,   further,  among  the   voters  a   large   proportion  vote   for the   candidate  supported  by   the   administration.  The   ministry  is almost  sure  of   getting   a   majority  of   its   candidates  elected.

The  Chamber  itself  has   little  political  activity.  The   deputies receive  no  pay,  and   so  cannot  afford  to   stay   at   their   own  expense all   through   the   session  ;   so,   many  are  absent  or  come  only   to   vote. Since  the   capital   has   been  at   Rome,  the   Italians  of   the   north, being   the   farthest  from  the   centre  (and   perhaps  the   most  occupied with   private   business),  have   left   the   Chamber  in   the   hands of   Sicilian  and   Neapolitan  deputies.  The  direction  of   Italy   has changed  hands,  passing  from  the  people  of   the   north  to   those of   the   south.  Now,   the   north  alone  had   the   habits  of   regular administration  and  liberal  monarchy;  the   south,  where  political interest  had   always   taken  the   form  of   revolution,  had   no  strength of   attachment  either  to  the   constitution  or  to   the   monarchy, which  had   both  come  from  the   north;  it   has   furnished  the   great mass  and   all   the   chiefs  of   the   radical  members.  Thus  was  established the   domination  of   both   the   south  and   the   radical  party. The  Catholics,  by   obeying  the   order  of   the   Holy   See   to   abstain from  the   parliamentary  elections,  have  diminished  the   number of   Conservative  voters  and  weakened  the   Right   in   the   same degree.

The   Left,   which  had   attained  power  through  the   personal  influence of   the   voters  of   southern  Italy   and   the   abstention  of   the Catholics,  supported  a   democratic  platform,  hostile  to  the Church:  extension  of   the   right   of   voting,   abolition  of   the   grist tax,   compulsory  primary  instruction,  administrative  and   judicial reforms,  "   liberty   of   conscience,"  or  measures  against   the   abuse of   clerical  influence,  state  administration  of   Church  revenues. But   the   party,  united  in   the   struggle  for   power,   divided  on   the attainment  of   it;   it   broke  into   personal  groups  supporting  rival chiefs.

The  division  first   took  the   form  of   a   difference  in   policy:   the

ministry  of   March  25,   1876,   headed  by   a   former  ally   of   Ratazzi, the   Sicilian  Depretis,  came  forward  with  a  moderate  left   program; it   postponed  the   abolition  of   the   grist   tax,   justifying  this   by the   deficit;   it   even  forbade  a  public   meeting  on  the   question. One  of   the   Radical  leaders  who   had   sustained  the   ministry,  Cairoli,   made  a   coalition  with  the   remaining  leaders  of   the   opposition and   joined   the   Right.   The   ministry   broke  up,   and   two months  after  the   death  of   Victor  Emmanuel  (January  9,   1878) was  formed  the   Cairoli  ministry  (March  23),   which  took  for   its program  the   diminution  of   the   taxes.  The  budget,  upset   by   this reform,  remained  at   first   in   deficit.  But   the   years  of   prosperity which  followed  produced  equilibrium  and  even  a  small  excess about  1889.

The  electoral  reform,  so   long   under  discussion,  ended  in   the law  of   1882.  The  left   did   not  want  universal  suffrage,  which would  have  put   the   votes  of   the   ignorant  and   wretched  peasants at   the   service  of   the   landowners.  They   limited  themselves  to lowering  the   voting   qualification,  based  on  property,  to   the   payment of   about   four   dollars  in   taxes  or   the   possession  of   a hundred-dollar  farm.  They   added  an  educational  qualification, conferring  the   right   of   voting   on  all   men  of   full   age   who   gave evidence  of   having  completed  the   prescribed  course  of   the   primary schools.  This  reform  carried  the   number  of   voters  from 627,000  to   2,048,000.  Of   these  710,000  get   the   right   in   virtue  of paying  taxes,  and   1,338,000  through  the   educational  qualification. The  rearrangement  of   electoral  districts  established  135   divisions of   the   kingdom,  in   each  of   which  two  or  more  deputies  were  to be   elected.  The  whole  number  assigned  to   any   division  had   to be   chosen  by   general  ticket  (scrutin  de   liste).   In   any   division having  five   or  more,  to   elect,   the   individual  voter  could  only   vote for   four.  The  whole  system  was,   however,  abandoned  in   1891, and  single-member  district  substituted.

The  Triple  Alliance  and  Personal  Rivalries. - Since  the  Left attained  power,  Italy's   political  history   has   been  a   series  of   personal contests,  parliamentary  intrigues,  secret  negotiations,  coalitions and   ruptures   between  parties,   and   sudden  transfers  of power.  The  real  reasons  for   these  actions  are   hard  for   a   foreigner to   penetrate,  and  even  the   Italians  are  not  agreed  on  a true  interpretation.  But  the   salient  features  of   the   period   are the   personal  rivalries  and   the   predominance  of   foreign   policy.

The  Left  divided  itself  into   groups  of   members,  each  attached to   a   chief   by   friendship  or   business  ties.  The   great   leaders  were

366  ITAL  Y.

two  Sicilians:  Depretis,  formerly  pro-dictator  in   1860;   Crispi, formerly  Garibaldi's  minister,  a   Republican,  "   rallied  "   to   the monarchy;  and  three  Neapolitans,  Cairoli,  Nicotera,  Zanardelli. Being   unable  to   agree   so   far   as   to   occupy  the   ministry   at   the   same time,  they   contended  for   the   possession  of   it.   The   groups  of the   chiefs  in   power   formed  the   ministerial  party,  the   groups  of the   chiefs  shut  out   from  the   ministry  formed  the   opposition. The  ministry  was  constituted  only   by   the   coalition  of   several leaders,  and  it   had  to   be   maintained  against  men  of   their own  party   in   opposition.  The  Right   either  joined   the   opposition Left  to   defeat  the   ministry,  or   joined   a   minority  of   the   Left   in supporting  a   ministry  distasteful  to   the   majority  of   the   Left.  The ministers  could  therefore  depend  only   on  passing  alliances  between the   rival   groups;   the   combinations  varied  with   the   personal relations  of   the   chiefs,   and   sometimes  they   were  overturned by   accidents  which  compromised  one  of   these  (Nicotera  in 1877,   after  the   revelation  of   his   past;   Crispi,   1878,   after   an  accusation of   bigamy).

All   these  rivalries  increased  the   King's   personal  influence; being   empowered  to   decide  between  the   rivals,  he   succeeded  in choosing  his   ministers  according  to   his   personal  preferences,  at the   same  time  preserving  the   outward  form  of   the   parliamentary system.  It   seems  that  he   chose  them  according  to   the   demands of   his   foreign   policy;   so   that   domestic  policy   must  still,   as   before the   union,   be   controlled  by   relations  with  foreign   powers.

The  French  alliance  party   had  been  the   Right,   the   northern Italians,  whom  the   French  had  delivered  from  Austria;  even  today Milan  remains  the   centre  of   opinion  favourable  to   France. The  Left,   Sicilians,  Neapolitans,  and  Romans,  was  the   natural enemy  of   Catholic  France,  which  had   defended  the   Pope   against the   Kingdom  of   Italy.  It   tended  therefore  to   look  toward  Germany. The   Left   attained  power  at   the   same  time  that  the French  Catholic  party   began  its   campaign  to  re-establish  the temporal  power  (1877);  this  decided  the   Italian  government  to cease  its   isolation  policy   and   to   seek   terms  of   alliance  with   Germany (1878).

Germany,  however,  had  allied  itself  with  Austria,  the  old enemy  of   the   Italian  Republicans;  and   France,  after  the   victory of   the   Republican  party,  ceased  to   threaten  Rome.  The  Italian government  wavered  several  years   between  the   German  states and  France.

The  Depretis  ministry  had  favoured  Germany,  Cairoli  pre-

ferred  France.  To   meet  the   Depretis-Nicotera-Crispi  coalition Cairoli  leaned  at   once  on  the   two  extremes,  the   Right   and   the Republicans;  he   granted  complete  freedom  of   speech   and   of   public meeting,  declaring  that  the   monarchy  had   nothing  to   fear from  liberty.

The  Republican  party   had  but  a  small  membership  in   the Chamber,  but   was  very  active  in   the   large   cities  (especially  Milan and  Rome) ; it   adopted  the   policy   of   the   Radicals,  and   began   to agitate   in   the   name  of   national  sentiment.  A   number  of   patriots declared  Italy   incomplete,  and  demanded  the  restoration  of provinces  speaking  the   Italian  language  but   occupied  by   foreign powers:  the   Tyrol   and   Trieste  by   Austria,  Nice  and   Corsica  by France,  Malta  by   England ;   this   was   Italia  irredenta  (unredeemed Italy).  The  Irredentist  party  threatened  Austria,  especially  by sending  to   the   malcontents  in   the   Tyrol   and   in   Trieste  messengers and   calls   to   revolution.  The   Cairoli  ministry   permitted  free agitation  by   the   Irredentist  republicans.  The  excitement  increased; a  cook,  Passanante,  tried  to  assassinate  the  King   at Naples  (November,  1878);   Barsanti  Clubs  were  formed  in   honour of   Barsanti,  a   subordinate  officer  who   was  shot   for   disobedience, and  later  Oberdank  Clubs  (Oberdank  was  a  young  student  of Trieste  condemned  to   death  in   1882  for   having  conspired  to assassinate  the   Emperor  of   Austria).  The   German  governments, as   in   Cavour's  time,   suspected  the   Italian  government  of   secretly encouraging  the  republican  agitation  for   the   delivery  of   Italian provinces  in   foreign  control.  Austria  advanced  troops  toward the   frontier  and   remained  in   very  cool   relations  with   Italy.   This was  the   period   of   the   Cairoli  ministries  (1878-81).*

But  when  France  took  possession  of   Tunis,  in   spite   of   Italy's objections,  public   opinion  turned  suddenly  against  France,  and Cairoli,  France's  friend,  fell   beyond  hope   of   recall.  Depretis and  Crispi,   Germany's  supporters,  took  the   ministry,  concluded the   Triple   Alliance,  and   stopped  all   the   Irredentist  and   Republican agitations. can

Depretis  quarrelled  very  soon  with  his   allies  of   the   Left,   but kept   his   position   through  the   King's   favour.  He   declared  that

*   December  18,   1878,  the  Depretis  ministry,  without  a  platform  and without  a   majority,  was  overthrown  by   Cairoli  and   Nicotera. - July   12,  1879, the   Cairoli  ministry  was  left   in   minority,  reconstructed  November  24   by   a Cairoli-Depretis  coalition,  and  overthrown  by   a   Crispi-Nicotera-Zanardelli coalition  in   April,   1880  ;   retained  its   place   by   means  of   a   dissolution  ;   overthrown again   April   7,   1881,   but   once  more  re-established  ;-  May   28,   1881, Depretis  ministry.

368  ITALY.

the   Left   had   exhausted  his   platform  of   1876   and   limited  himself to   maintaining  the   constitution  and  the   national  monarchy,  or, in   other  words,  to   fighting   the   Republicans;  he   called  upon   the members  of   the   Right   who  were  willing  to   join   him.  This   he called  the   transformismo  (September,  1882).  Depretis  governed (1882-87)  with  a   coalition  of   Centres  against   the   other   chiefs   of the   Left.  His   system  was  to   abandon  ministers  who   were  too sharply  attacked  and  to  reconstruct  a  new  ministry  from  the remains  of   the   old   one   (he   formed  eight   ministries).  The   five other  chiefs  of   the   Left   declared  this   system  unconstitutional  and formed  (November,  1883)   a  general  coalition  of   deputies  from central  Italy,   which  became  known  as   the   Pentarchy  (Cairoli, Crispi,   Nicotera,  Zanardelli,  and   Baccharini).  A   new  socialist party   began   to   make  its   appearance  at   the   elections  of   1886, chiefly   in   Lombardy  and  the   Romagna;  the   ministry  fought against   it   and   dissolved  all   the   workingmen's  clubs. But  this  ministry  failed  in   its   colonial  policy.  The   Pentarchists  profited   by   the   expenditure  and   failure  of   the   Abyssinian expedition  (begun   in   1885)   to   force   Depretis  to   take   into   his ministry  two  of   their  men,   Crispi   and   Zanardelli  (April,   1887). Depretis  died   in   July.   (Successive  Depretis  ministries:  May   28, 1882;   August,  1883;   1884;   1885;   1887.)

Crispi's   Government  (1887-96). - Crispi   supplanted  Depretis  in the   King's   confidence,  and   pursued  Depretis'  policy,   the   Triple Alliance  and   war  on   the   Republicans.  He   also   advocated  a   new classification  of   parties,   declaring  that   the   terms  Right   and   Left had   lost   their   significance,  and   that   what  Italy   needed  was  two great  constitutional  parties.  He  affirmed  that  his   ministry would  be   strictly   parliamentary,  that   he   loved  liberty   and   wished for   peace,   both   at   home  and   abroad;  he   announced  no  great   reform projects,   but   simply   the   intention  of   improving  the   administration of   justice,  the   management  of   education,  the   army, industry,  and   trade.  He   placed   his   reliance  on  the   Left,   which promised  him  a   large   majority.  His   administration  was  mainly occupied  with  combatting  the   opponents  of   the   monarchy - the Pope,   the   Republicans,  the   Irredentists,  and   the   Socialists.

Depretis  had  tried  to   settle  the   Church  question  by   a   reconciliation with   the   Pope;   the   King   said,   in   1887,   that   the   relations with  the   Holy   See   were  going   to   become  better;  but   Leo   XIII. refused  to   renounce  his   temporal  power,  and  Crispi   opened  the contest  once  more.  The  new  penal   code  (1889)   punished  with imprisonment  and  hard  labour  any  attempt  against  the   unity   of the   state,  and   with   one  year's   imprisonment  any  servant  of   the

Church  who  should,  in   the   performance  of   his   office,   criticise  any action  on  the   part   of   the   government.

Crispi   placed   the   Republican  and   Irredentist  agitation  in   the hands  of   the   police.  He   suppressed  the   demonstrations  of   the unemployed  in   Rome  (February,  1888),   dissolved  the   committee on   Trieste  and  Trent  as  menacing  the  alliance  with  Austria, "   the   foundation  of   the   peace  of   Europe,  and   the   guarantee  of Italian  independence  and  unity,"  forbade  the  celebration  in honour  of   Oberdank  (1889),  the  celebration  in   memory  of   the Roman  Republic  of   1849,   the   democratic  congress  at   Catania,  and declared  the   Barsanti  and  Oberdank  clubs  disbanded  (August, 1890).  He   even  had   the   King   dismiss  one  of   his   own  colleagues, the   minister  of   finance,  for   having   listened  without  protest  to   an Irredentist  speech   at   a   banquet.

He   declared  himself  an  enthusiastic  advocate  of   the   Triple   Alliance (March   17,   1888);   and,   in   spite   of   the   enormous  charges   on the   budget,  protested  against  any   idea  of   disbanding  the   army (February,  1889).  "If,"  he   said,   "Italy  alone  disarmed,  she would  commit  a  crime"  (November,  1890).  He  continued  his attempts  on  the   Red  Sea,   where  he   finally   succeeded  in   establishing the   colony   of   Erythrea   and   the   protectorate  over  the Abyssinian  Empire.

The  expenses  of   this  colonial  policy   and   the   business  crisis upset  the   balance  of   the   budget.  In   1887   Italy   entered  upon  a chronic  state  of   deficit,  and   Italian  bonds  began   to   fall   again. The  opposition  Right   in   the   Chamber  and   the   Republican  party through  the  country  began  to  attack  the  government  on   its financial  policy,   and   demanded  a   reduction  of   military  expenses. But   Crispi   had   the   King   on   his   side,   the   great   head   of   the   army, and  as   he   controlled  the   elections,  he   secured  for   himself  a   devoted majority   in   the   House.  The   Chamber  elected  in   November, 1890,   after   a   dissolution,  was   four-fifths  made  up   of   supporters of   the   ministry.  Italy,   like   France  under  the   Guizot  ministry, was,   though   under  parliamentary  forms,  governed  by   a partnership  between  the  King   and  his  prime  minister.  But Crispi   had  in   his   Republican  past   learned  to  consider  public opinion  and  to   try   and   make  himself  popular.  Contrary  to   the demands  of   the   Republicans,  he   appealed  to   patriotism,  presenting the   military   monarchy  and   the   Triple   Alliance  as  necessary guarantees  of   Italian  unity,   threatened  by   France  and   the   Pope, and   defending  the   Red   Sea   expeditions  in   the   name  of   the   honour of   the   Italian  armies.  The  violent  attacks  made  by   French papers  furthered  his  policy,  for,   in   reproaching  Crispi  with 24

370  ITALY.

megalomania,  they   wounded  Italian  pride,   for   all   Italy   was   desirous of   becoming  a   colonial  power.  As   far   as  one  can  see   into Italian  opinion,  it   seems  that   Crispi   must   have   given   the   impression, to   the   middle  classes  at   least,   of   being   the   one  minister necessary  to   Italian  honour.  -

He   lost   his   ministry   suddenly  in   January,  1891,   by   an   ill-judged remark  in   the   Chamber,  which  offended  the   deputies  of   the Right,*  and   for   over  two  years   he   was  excluded  from  the   ministry. It   was,   however,  only   an   intermission.

First  came  a   ministry  of   the   Right   under  di   Rudini,  re-enforced by   one  of   the   leaders  of   the   Left,   Nicotera  (February  9, 1891),   which  announced  itself  in   favour  of   an  economic  policy and   "   fidelity   to   alliances  ";   the   only   reform  was  the   suppression of   the   general   ticket.  It   sought   a   reconciliation  with   the   Pope, and  to   get   him   to   recognise  the   law   of   guarantees  of   1871;   the Pope   replied   (allocution  of   December  14,   1891),   complaining  of both  parties,   the   one  that   "   wished  to   deal   the   death  blow   to   the papacy  "   (Crispi),  and  the   one  that  "   wished  to  subject  the Church  to   the   state   "   (the   Right),   both   of   which  hindered  communication with   believers;   he   demanded  the   complete   independence of   Rome.

Then  came  a  ministry  of   the  Left  under  Giolitti,  without Crispi   (May   15,   1892),   which,   by   dissolving  the   Chamber,  gained for   itself   an  enormous  majority.  It   was,   however,  compromised by   the   Roman  Bank  scandal,  when  the   discovery  was  made  that it   had   illegally   issued  65,000,000  of   notes  (January,  1893);   the parliamentary  committee  of   investigation  presented  a   report   "   regretting "   and  "   disapproving  "   the   irregularities,  naming  the deputies  guilty   of   indiscretion,  among  them  a   minister,  a   personal friend  of   Giolitti,  and   proving   that   the   ministry  had   been  aware of   the   situation  since  1889.   The   Giolitti  ministry  retired  (November, 1893).

Crispi   then   resumed  power  and   held  it   until  1896,   reconstructing his   ministry   but   once  (June,   1894).   The   Left  seemed  to have  broken  its   monarchist  coalition  with  the   Right,   in   order to   resume  its   former  democratic  platform.  Crispi   demanded  an elective  Senate,  pay   for   deputies,  and   reduction  of   the   standing army   (speech  at   Palermo,  November,  1892).  He   declared  himself " the   apostle  of   peace,  not  of   war,"   and  like   his   models, Mazzini  and  Garibaldi,  the  supporter  of   the   federation  of   the

* In   the   course  of   debate  Crispi   referred  to   the   foreign  policy   pursued by   the   ministries  up   to   1876   (the   Right).  He   was  reproached  with  having said   that   their   policy   had   been  "   servile  toward  foreign   powers."

nations  (speech  at   the   unveiling  of   the   monument  to   Garibaldi, October,  1893).  But  once  more  at   the   head  of   the   ministry,  he presented  himself  as  a  government  of   public   safety   against  the attacks  of   Republicans  and   Socialists.  He   appealed,  as   before, to   all   the   constitutional  parties   to   defend  the   monarchy  and   build up   its   injured   credit  and   its   burdened  finances.  "   Our   country's situation  is   graver  than   ever.  .   .   We   need   harmony  in   the   Chambers without  party   difference;  I   invite  you   to   arrange  a   truce  of God.  .  .   Until  1890   we  worked  to   secure  material  unity   of   our country;  now  we  must  secure  moral  unity"  (declaration  of   December 20,   1893).   "   Let  us  press  close  about  the   King,   who  is the   symbol  of   unity   "   (May,   1894).

Since  then  Italian  politics   have  centred  in   the   contest  between Crispi  and  the   opponents  of   monarchy.  The  Socialists  had organized  trade  unions,  especially  in   Lombardy,  Carrara,  and Romagna.  In   Sicily   they   have  taken  advantage  of   the   wretched condition  of   the   unsophisticated  peasants,  at   the   mercy  of   the great   landlords,  to   unite  them  in   labour  organisations  (fasti).  The Sicilian  fasti  have  stirred  up   bread  riots  (1893).  The  government seized   the   occasion  to   put   the   island  under  martial  law (January,  1894),   to   send  troops,  to  procure  the   condemnation of   the   Socialist  leaders  by   military  courts,*  to  suppress  all through  Italy   the   right   of   public   meeting  and   suspend  the   liberty of   the   press.  In   order  to   ward  off   a   deficit,   it   decreed  increase in   taxes  and   in   customs  duties.  The   ministry  induced  the Chambers  to  grant   it   special^   powers.  Crispi,   the   King's   confidential minister,   has   governed  as  a   dictator;  the   old   democratic Left,   now  a   part   of   the   government,  has   adopted  the   old   absolutist methods  to   stop   the   progress  of   the   new   democracy.  It has   seemed  even  to   give   up   the   fight   against   its   traditional  opponent and   to   try   to   gain   favour  with   the   Catholic  party   by   making peace  with  the   Pope.

The  Republican  party   has   stripped  for   the   contest;  it   attacks in   the   Chamber  every  policy   adopted  by   the   ministry,  represents measures  of   repression  as  contrary  to   the   liberty   promised  by   the constitution,  colonial  expeditions  and  armaments  as  the   causes of   the   economic  and  financial  crisis,   the   Triple   Alliance  as   the cause  for   armament.  It   demands  liberty  of   the   press,  public

*   Molinari,  a   lawyer,  leader  of   the   socialist  party  of   Carrara  marblecutters,  was  condemned  to  23  years   imprisonment  for   having  founded  a society  to   destroy  the  family  and  private  property.  De   Felice,  a   deputy, a   member  of   the   central  committee  of   the  Sicilian  fasci,   was  condemned to   1  8   years   hard  labour  for   having  signed   a   manifesto.

372  ITALY.

meeting  and  association,  disarmament  or  reduction  in   military expenses,  and   neutrality  toward  Germany  and   France.  Since  the government  decreed  the   dissolution  of   all   the   socialist  or   labour societies  (October  22,   1894),   the   Republicans  have  founded  the

"   League   for   the   Protection  of   Liberty." Crispi,  finding  his   support  in   the   Chamber  becoming  less ardent,  had  the   House  adjourned,  then  dissolved  (May,   1895); in   a   manifesto  speech   he   declared  that   the   voters  must  choose between  "   the   national  monarchy  "   and   "   social,   moral,   and   political anarchy,"  and   invited  "   all   good   citizens  to   rally   round  the King   " ; he   gave   assurance  that   the   financial  crisis  was  at   an  end. As   is   usual  in   Italy,   there  was  a   large   government  majority  in the   new   Chamber  (355   against  172),   which  approved  the   taxes imposed  by   the   government.  The  Radicals  and   Socialists  had, however,  gained  seats;  the  meetings  of   the   Chamber  became more  excited;  the  deputies  disputed  over  the  amnesty,  and Cavallotti  published  a  violent  pamphlet  against  Crispi.  A   partial amnesty   for   persons  condemned  for   political  offences  was  not enough  to  conciliate  the   revolutionists.  The  two  oppositions, Right   and  Left,   joined   against   Crispi;   di   Rudini,  the   leader  of the   Right,   reproached  him  with  suppressing  the   liberty   of   the press,  confusing  socialists  with  anarchists,  and  compromising the   prosperity  of   the   nation.

As   always   in   Italy,   foreign   policy   determined  the   outcome  of domestic  affairs.  The  disaster  to   the   Italian  army   in   Abyssinia compelled  Crispi  to  retire  (March,  1896).  The  Conservative ministry  (di   Rudini),  which  the   King   consented  to   take,   has   retained its   position,  without  having  to   dissolve  the   Chamber,  by pursuing  a  policy   of   conciliation,  peace,  and  economy.  It   has granted  political  amnesty,  renounced  the   conquest  of   Abyssinia, and   reduced  colonial  expenditure.  It   seems,   however,  to   maintain itself   in   a   very   unstable  equilibrium.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.- For  the  detailed  bibl.  of   the  history  of   Italy,   see Ch.-V.  Langlois,  "Manuel  de   Bibliog.  Histor.,"  1896   (pp.   51,   120,  157,   167). There  is   as   yet   no  complete  Italian  bibl.  of   modern  history   ;   the   bibl.  of the   Risorgimento  is   rather  more  a   bookseller's  catalogue.  The  "   Ri- vista   Storica  Italiana  "   gives   a   good   bibl.   of   books  published  since  1884. DOCUMENTS.- For  legislative  documents,  see  Brusa,  "   Staatsrecht  d. K.   Italien."  For   legislative  documents  (Sardinia,  later  Kingdom  of   Italy), see   Miihlbreclit,  "   Wegweiser  durch  die   Literatur  der   Rechts-  und   Staatswissenschaften,"  1893.

The   most  abundant  category  is   that  of   memoirs,  recollections,  and  let-

ters.  The  following  are  the  most  important:  Pepe,  "   Memoires,"  etc.,  3 vols.,   1847,   Naples  revolution.- D'Aaeglio,  "Souvenirs,"  2   vols.,  1867   (Fr. trans,  of   1876);   "   Lettere,"  1883,   revolution  of   1848.- La   Farina,  "   Epistolario,   1869. - Manin,  "Lettere,"  1859,   Venice  revolution. - Garibaldi,  "Autobiography" (in   Engl.),  3   vols.,   1889.- Eicasoli,  "   Lettere  e   document!,"  10 vols.,   1888-95,  Tuscany  and  foundation  of   the  kingdom.- Cavour,  "Discorsi,"  12 vols.,   1863-72  ;   "   Lettere, "6 vols. - 1883-87  ;   "   Nouvelles  Lettres," 1889.- Persano,  "   Diario,"  1870,   Fr.   trans.,  Gamier,  "Journal  debordde  P.," 1870. - Mazzini  :   a   special   bibl.   of   his   works  is   given   by   G.   Canestrelli,  1892.

The  principal  collections  of   political  documents  are  :   "   Carte  Segrete  et Atti  uffiziali  della  Politica  Austriaca  in   Italia,  1814-48,"  3   vols.,   1851,  a publication  against  the  Austrian  government,  and  especially  Bianchi, "   Storia  Documentata  della  Diplomazia  Europea  in   Italia,"  8   vols.,  186572,   documents  on   Italy's   relations  with  the   European  governments.

For   very  recent  events  see   "   Annual  Register  "   and  "   Geschichtskalender,"  and  the  semi-panegyrical  biographies  indicated  in   the  "   Rivista Storica." - On   political  customs,  Laveleye,  "   Lettres  d'ltalie,"  1880  ;   "   Nouvelles Lettres,"  1884.

The  principal  political  reviews  have  been  "   Antologia  Italiana,"  vol.   i., 184(3;   then  "Rivista  Contemporanea,"  1853   to   1870,  then  "   Nuova  Antologia," since   1866   ; "   Revue  Internationale  "   (in   Fr.),   since  1883.

WORKS.- GENERAL  HISTORIES  :   There  are  several  general  histories  in Italian,  all   a   little   prolix   and   lacking   in   critical  value. - Cantu,   "Storia  di Cente  Anni,"  3   vols.,   stops   at   1850   ;   continued  by   "   Della  Indep.   Italiana Cronistoria,"  3   vols.,  1872-77.  "   L'Hist.  des   Italiens,"  Fr.   trans.,  1862, stops  at  1861.  Cantu  is   Catholic  and  a  patriot.-  Muratori,  "Annali d'ltalia,"  history  of   the   i8th  cent,  continued  up   to   1870,   a   chronological compilation.- The  only   critical  hist,  is   Reuchlin,  "   Geschichte  Italiens,"  4 vols.,  1859-73  ("Staatengeschichte  "   collect.  ),   which  goes   to   1870.  The author  is   rather  a   Gallophobian.- In   French,  Sorin,  "Hist,  de   1'Italie," 1888.- Zeller,  "   Pie   IX.   et   Victor-Emmanuel,"  1879   :   popular  works.

HISTORIES  OF   DIFFERENT  PERIODS  :   Nisco,  "   Storia  d'ltalia,"  3   vols.,   188185,   up   to   1830.- Tivaroni,  "   Storia  Critica  del   Risorgimento,"  9   vols.,   189196. -Costa  de Beauregard,  "   Dernieres  Annees  du   Roi   Charles- Albert,"  1890. - Perrens,  "Deux  Ans  de  Revolution  en  Italic  (1848-49),"  1857. Chiala,  "   Dal   Congresso  di   Plombieres  al   Congresso  di   Berlino,"  1892.Bersezio,  "   II   Regno   di   Vittorio  Emmanuele,"  8   vols.,  1878-95. - Mistrali, "   Da   Novara  a   Roma,"  5   vols.,  1870-79  (period  1849-70).- Petrucelli  della Gattina,  "   Storia  d'ltalia,"  1882  (period  1866-80).- Treitschke,  "   Histor.  und Polit.  Aufsatze,"  vol.  ii.,   5th   edit.,   1886,   gives   a   vivid  description  of   the formation  of   the   Italian  union  and   Cavour's  work.

HISTORIES  OF  THE  STATES:  Erofferio,  "Storia  di   Piemonte,"  3   vols., 1849-52.- Farini,  "   Lo   Stato  Romano,"  4   vols.,   1850-53.- Nisco,   ··   Ferdinand II    "   1884   (Kingdom  of   Naples).

INSTITUTIONS:  Brusa,  "Staatsrecht  d.   K.   Italien,"  1890   (Marquardsen coll.),   gives,   beside  a   study   of   the   existing   system,  a   very   detailed  historic notice  and  a   list   of   special   works.- The  most  important  is   L.   Palma,  "   Corso di  Diritto  Costituzionale,"  3  vols.,  1884-86. - On  Finances,  J.Sachs, "   L'ltalie,  ses   Finances  .  .   .   1859-84,"  1885   ;   a   great   deal   of   information, but   poorly   classified.

## CHAPTER   XII.

## GERMANY   BEFORE  THE  UNION.

Germany  in   1814. - Germany  retained,  even  in   the   eighteenth century,  the   old   confused  organization  of   the   Holy   Roman  Empire. In   outward  appearance  it   was  a   federal  state  with   an   elective sovereign,  the   Emperor,  and   a   federal  assembly,  the   Diet. But  the   organs  of   this   federal  government  had   no  real   power; each  particular  state,  though   theoretically  subject   to   the   Emperor, was  practically  independent.  In   these  states,  which  were  organized under   the   most   diverse  constitutions,  the   sovereigns  were  of every  sort,   king,   duke,   prince,   count,   bishop   or  abbot,   knight,   and city   corporation;  their  internal  governments  were  of   the   most varied  character,  but   with   one  common  trait :   all   these   petty   governments were   absolute.  This   confused  Empire   had   no  precise limit;   a   number  of   the   sovereigns  had   possessions  both  within the   Empire  and  outside  (Austria,  Prussia,  Denmark,  Sweden), and  made  little  distinction  between  their  imperial  and   foreign provinces.

The  French  wars  lessened  this   confusion.  In   Germany,  as   in the   Netherlands,  Switzerland,  Spain,   and  Italy,   the   French  invasion swept   away   ancient  institutions  and   prepared  the   ground for   the   modern  nation.  But   this   clearing  of   the   ground   had   not been  completed.  The  Emperor  and  the  Diet  had  disappeared, but   there  still   remained  an   Austrian  Emperor.  Napoleon  had destroyed  the   smallest  and   least  promising  states,  the   knights  of the   Empire,  the   Church  States,  and   the   free   cities  (with   the   exception of   six);   the   number  of   sovereigns  had   decreased  from about  300   to   38,   and   there  remained  only   the   lay   princes.  This work  of   simplification  had,   however,  been  accomplished  only   in the  south,  where  the  suppressed  states  had  been  divided  up among  four  states.  In   the   north  the   petty   princes   had   not   been disturbed  (Anhalt,  Lippe,  Reuss,  the  Saxon  duchies,  etc.),   so the   region   of   small  states  was  no   longer   Southern  but   Northern Germany.  Many  princes  had  taken  new  titles,  and  there  were five   king's   (Hanover,  Prussia,  Saxony,  Wurtemburg,  and  Bavaria). Their   royalty,   however,  was  not  entirely   independent.

In   the   region   that   had   been  directly  subject   to   France  (the left   bank  of   the   Rhine)   French  customs  were  firmly   fixed,   civil equality,  personal  liberty,  and  regular,  uniform  administration. The  princes  of   Southern  Germany  copied  this  system  in   their states,   but   in   the   other  states  the   old   regime   had   been   maintained. Sweden  and  France  had  severed  their  connection  with  Germany, but   there  remained  five   rulers  of   territory  in   Germany  who  also had  possessions  outside:  two  of   these  were  German  sovereigns, the   Emperor  of   Austria  and   the   King   of   Prussia;  three  of   them were  foreign  sovereigns,  the  King   of   Denmark  (as   Duke  of Holstein),  the   King   of   England  (as   King   of   Hanover),  and   the King   of   the   Netherlands  (as   Duke  of   Luxemburg).

Germany  was  still,   therefore,  in   1814,   under  a   regime   of   small states  with  incomplete  sovereignty,  of   absolutism  and  of   crisscross with   foreign   sovereigns.  She   had   been  only   partly   modernized and   must  still   pass   through   a   long   crisis   before  getting rid   of   the   remnants  of   her   old   regime.

Formation  of   the   Germanic  Confederation  (1815). - After  the French  had  been  driven  out,   the   Germans  felt   the   need  of   organizing a   stronger  state  than  the   old   Empire  for   resisting  French attacks.  But  they   had  no   definite  idea  as   to   the   exact  form  to give   this   state.

Many  patriots,  brought  up   under  the   Holy   Roman  Empire, were  attached  to   this   venerable  form  of   government  under  which Germany  had  attained  her  period  of   grandeur  in   the   Middle Ages.  Baron  vom  Stein,  a  mediatized  knight,  formerly  a   direct subject  of   the  Emperor,  could  not  imagine  Germany  under any  system  but  the  Empire.  Assuming  the  Empire,  the  Emperor could   not   be   of   any   house  but   Hapsburg,  the   royal   house of   Austria;  he   would  form,   together  with  the   leading  princes, a   Directorium  to   direct  affairs  of   common  interest.  This  plan   of restoration  met  with  irresistible  opposition.  The  Emperor  of Austria  was  no   longer  interested  in   establishing  a   Germany where  the   King   of   Prussia  would  be   more  powerful  than  he;   he refused  to   accept  the   imperial  crown,  preferring  to   remain  Emperor of   Austria  and  to   content  himself  with  a   diplomatic  influence over   the   governments  of   the   small  German  states.  The German  princes  were  unwilling  to   submit  themselves  to   a   central government  which  in   practice  would  have  been  composed  of   the Emperor  and  the  King   of   Prussia;  they   greatly  preferred  to retain  their  own  sovereignty,  which  they   had  held  since  the   dissolution of   the   Empire  in   1806.  A   sovereign  federal  government ence

would  be   irreconcilable  with  local  sovereignty;  to   establish  it would  necessitate  the   destruction  of   the   petty   sovereigns.  Now, in   1813,   the   Allies  had   preferred  to   detach  them  from  Napoleon, by   guaranteeing  them  their  lands  and   titles  by   treaties ; the   King of   Saxony,  who  had  no  treaty,   had  been  saved  by   the   plenipotentaries  of   the   Congress  of   Vienna  (see   p.   8).   There  could, therefore,  be   no  thought  of   restoring  the   Empire,  or  even  of establishing  a   federal  state.

Austria  and  Prussia  drew  up   a  scheme.  The  petty  princes, unwilling  to   let   the   two  great   German  powers  determine  the organization  of   Germany,  agreed  to  sign   the  note  of   the  32 "   minor  states"  (February  2,   1815),   demanding  a  general  congress of   all   the   German  states.  The  great  states  signified  their assent;  then,   for   form's  sake,   invited  to   their  conferences  delegates from   all   the   sovereigns.  In   the   Federal  Act   (June   18)   "   the sovereign  princes  and   free   cities  "   declared  themselves  united  by a   permanent  alliance,  to   be   known  as   the   Germanic  Confederation (Deutscher  Bund).

The  aim  was  defined  as   "   the   maintenance  of   external  and internal  security  and   the   independence  and   integrity  of   the   individual states,"   but   they   avoided  defining   the   powers  of   the   federal government.

The  Confederation  had  but   one  organ,  the   Federal  Assembly or   Diet   (Bundesversammlung),  a  permanent  conference  of   envoys from   all   the   governments,  sitting   at   Frankfort  under  the presidency  of   the   Austrian  delegate.  They   were  not   deputies with  freedom  of   voting,  but   officers  sent  by   their  government with   precise   instructions  and   obliged   to   ask   instructions  before each  vote.  In   ordinary  affairs  they   acted  under  the   name  of   the Engere  Rath;   the   great   states  had   each  a   vote,   the   others  uniting in   groups  to   cast  a   collective  vote   (there   were  17   votes  in   all). In   voting   on  certain  classes  of   questions  (constitution,  religion, and   admission  of   new  states),   the   Assembly  voted  as  a   plenum, and   the   number  of   votes  assigned  to   each  state  differed  according to   importance  (69   in   all;   Austria,  Prussia,  and  the   four kingdoms  had   each   4).   But   for   all   important  affairs  no   decision could  be   made  by   a   majority;  the   vote  had   to   be   unanimous  in order  to   be   effective. voys

The   Assembly  was  to   formulate  fundamental  laws  and   organic institutions  for   the   Confederation  with  reference  to   its   foreign, military,  and   domestic  affairs,   but   each   particular  state  controlled its   own   diplomacy,  its   army,  and   its   government.  There  was

no   federal  court  and   no  representative  of   the   Confederation  in foreign  states.  In   practice  the   princes   remained  sovereigns  and the   Assembly  was  only   the   congress  of   their  ambassadors.

The  Assembly  was  to   open   September  I,   1815,   but   it   awaited the   settlement  of   the   frontier  questions  between  states;  it   met the   following  summer,  but   did   not  actually  open  until  November 5,   1816;  popular  interest  in   it   began   to   languish.  In   the early   days   of   its   session  a   number  of   delegates  tried  to   present projects,  but   it   soon  became  apparent  that  the   Assembly  was so  organized  that  it   could  not  reach  any   decision.  Every   question must  wait   for   the   consent  of   each   government;  the   government that   did   not   wish   to   have   a   question   settled  did   not  need to  answer,  but  only   to  refrain  from  answering.  The  middle states  especially,  jealous  of   their  sovereignty,  hindered  every motion.  The  slowness  of   the   Assembly  became  proverbial;  several instances  of   it   are  still   famous.  The  lawyers  and   legal agents  of   the   old   imperial  court  made  a  claim  for   salaries  due from  1806  to   1816,   which  was  granted  in   1831;   the   creditors  of the   fund  for   converting  the   debts  contracted  in   the   wars  from 1792   to   1801   were  paid   in   1843;   the   liquidation  of   the   debts  for the   Thirty   Years  War  was  completed,  at   the   end   of   two  centuries, in   1850.   The   most  urgent  matter  was  the   organization  of   military defence:  now,  the   plans   for   regulating  the   army  were  not drawn  up   until  1821,   and   not  applied   until  1840;   the   forces  furnished by   the   states  were  organized  in   1831,   1835,   an&lt;3  1836, and  were  never  united;  the   fe4eral   fortresses,  of   which  France had  paid   the   cost   in   1815,   were  not  yet   constructed  in   1825;   the Confederation  was  waiting  to   choose  between  Ulm  and  Rastadt.

The  Assembly  met  often,  appointed  many  committees  (there were  as  many  as  30   at   once),   with   much  solemnity  of   procedure, like   the   old   Diet;   but   it   had   no  power  whatever,  and   became  the laughing  stock  of   Germany  and  of   all   Europe.

The  Individual  Governments  and  Constitutions. - Each  prince, being  a  sovereign,  arranged  his   government  to  suit  himself. Those  who  drafted  the   plan   for   the   constitution  had   proposed securing  to  subjects  certain  guarantees  by   Article  13:   "There must  be   established  within  one  year  a  system  of   assemblies  of estates."  But  in   the   final  draft  they   omitted  the   one-year  limit, and  replaced  the   phrase   "   There  must  "   (Es   soil)   by   "   There  will be   "   a   system  of   Estates  (Es   wird).   The   Liberals  ridiculed  this formula:  "   that   is   not  a   law,"   they   said;   " it   is   a   prophecy."

They   had   purposely  employed  an  ancient  term,   Landst'dndiscke

## 378  GERMANY  BEFORE    THE    UtflON.

Verfassung  (organization  based  on  the  Estates),  to   avoid  the revolutionary  term  constitution.  The  universally  admitted  principle is   that   the   prince   alone  possesses  the   sovereignty,  but   that   he has   the   right   to   let   his   subjects   share   in   the   government.  The   government of   each  state,  therefore,  depended  on   the   personal  wishes of   the   prince.  Germany  was   divided  between  three  systems.

1.   In   the   pure   absolutist  system,  the   Prince  governed  alone with  his   ministers  and   officers,  without  any   restraint,  without  any assembly  of   subjects.     This  was  the   regime   of   the   most  powerful states,   Austria  and   Prussia;  several  princes  of   the   north  copied them.     The  best  known  of   these  was  the   Elector  of   Hesse,  the only   one  that   bore   the   old   title   of   Elector,  deprived   of   its   significance since   the   breaking   up   of   the   Empire.      He   had   at   first   convoked an   assembly,   but   dismissed  it   in   1816   and   governed  alone. He  had  been  driven  out   in   1806,   but   he   pretended  to   recognise nothing  that   had   been  accomplished  during   his   absence;  he   reestablished his   old   laws,   corvees,  and   corporations;  he   restored his   civil   servants  to   their  former  places,   his   military  officers  to their  former  ranks;  ordered  his   soldiers  to  wear  their  hair  in queue  (zopf)   as   formerly,  and   took  back  the   princely  domains that   had   been  sold   as  national  property.     The   confederation  remonstrated with   him,   for   the   purchasers  of   national  property   had been  guaranteed  by   treaties;  he   replied   that   he   admitted  no   intervention in   the   administration  of   his   state.

2.   The   majority  of   the   princes   of   northern  Germany  (Hanover, Mecklenburg,  Saxony,  later  Oldenburg)  adopted  a  system  of assemblies  of   estates  (Landstande).  They   made  no  promises  to their   subjects,  but   they   convoked  the   traditional  assembly  of   notables of   the   land,   composed  chiefly   of   nobles,  and   ordered  them, according  to   ancient  custom,  to   vote  taxes  and   guarantee  loans. The  assembly  made  use  of   this  opportunity  to   present  claims; but   it   was  only   a   concession  granted  to   public   opinion,  not  a real   controlling  power  over  the   administration.     In   Hanover, the   government  could  not  arrange  with  the   nobles  to   put   in   one fund   the   proceeds  of   the   domain  and   the   taxes,  and   accomplished its   reforms  by   ordinance.     It   finally,   in   1819,   transformed  the assembly  by   dividing  it   into   two   houses,  nobles  and  commons. It   forbade  the   publication  of   debates,  and   only   permitted  the   publication of   extracts  from  the   journal  which  were  so  uninteresting that   they   found   few   purchasers.     In   Mecklenburg,  the   legislature consisted  of   representatives  of   the   nobles  and   privileged municipalities;  the   nobles  were  the   controlling  power,   filled  all ing

offices,  and   maintained  their  absolute  power  over  the   peasants. Every  proprietor  of   a   noble  estate  was  master  on   his   own   land ; he exercised  justice  and  police,  and  the   right   to   grant  or  refuse change  of   domicile.  In   Saxony  the   King,   absorbed  in   the   maintenance of   his   rank,   never  went  out  on   foot  and   never  spoke   to anyone  beneath  the   rank  of   colonel.  The   government  refused  the assembly  information  on   financial  affairs  and   forbade  published reports  of   debates.  In   Oldenburg,  the   Grand  Duke  declared that  before  organizing  the   assembly  it   would  be   well  to   observe the   success  of   such   institutions  in   other  countries.

3.   A   number  of   princes,   mainly   in   the   south,   decided  to   grant written  constitutions  in   imitation  of   France,  with  a   body   of   elective representatives  empowered  to   vote  laws  and  taxes  proposed by   the   government.  They   had  no   intention  of   establishing  a parliamentary  government;  the  prince  remained  sovereign, choosing  his   ministers  independently  of   the   majority,  and  even reserving  to   himself  the   right   of   proposing  new  laws.  It   was simply  a  constitutional  monarchy,  according  to   Tory   doctrine, as  under  Louis  XVIII.

The  example  was  given  by   the  most  liberal  of   the   German princes,  the   patron  of   learning,  the   Grand  Duke  of   Saxe-Weimar. He  granted  his   subjects  a  constitution,  and   placed   it   under  the protection  of   the   Confederation  by   recognising  the   right   of   the federal  power  to   use  all   means  of   constraint  upon   himself  and   his people  if   either  side  should  fail   in   keeping  their  engagements. He  established  an  assembly  of   deputies,  knights,  cities,  and peasants  meeting  in   a   single   asembly  with  the   power  of   passing on  the   budget,  voting   laws  and   taxes,  and   of   demanding  redress of   grievances.  He   guaranteed  freedom  of   the   press,  emancipating it   wholly  from  the   censorship.

The  other  princes  hesitated  long   before  adopting  a  system looked  on  with  disfavour  by   the   governments  of   the   chief  states. But   all   those  of   southern  Germany  finally   granted   written  constitutions which   established  a   representative  body   with   the   right   of voting  laws  and  taxes,  also  guaranteeing  individual  liberty  and equality  before  the   law:  Bavaria  (May,   1818),   Baden  (August, 1818),  Wurtemburg  (1819),  Hesse-Darmstadt  (1820).  There were  also  constitutions  in   Nassau,  Brunswick,  and  some  small Saxon  duchies.  In   Wurtemburg  the   King   had  granted  a  representative constitution  as   early   as   1815,   but   the   Estates,   which   held him  in   contempt,  demanded  the   previous  constitution;  a   conflict followed  which  lasted,  under  his   successor,  until  1819.

Parties  in   Germany. - In   all   the   countries,  the   mass  of   the   German people,   accustomed  to   absolute  government,  remained  indifferent to   public   affairs,  and   even  among  cultivated  men  only a   few   dared  to   express  an  opinion.  Those  who   occupied  themselves with   political   matters  were   divided  into   three   groups  corresponding to  the  three  forms  of   government  established  in Germany. man

The  absolutists  acknowledged  no  other  power  than  the   Prince and   his   officers;  they   condemned  every   form  of   constitution  as  a revolutionary  innovation,  every  representative  assembly  as  an institution  of   disorder,  every  sort  of   constraint  as  an   insult  to   the sovereign.  The  theory  had  been  formulated  with  logical  rigour by   a   Swiss  convert  to   absolutism,  L.   von   Haller,  in   his   "   Restoration of   Political  Science"  (1816),   a   sort  of   refutation  of   Rousseau's "   Social  Contract."  Haller  rejected  natural  rights,   social  contract, and   sovereignty  of   the   people   as   contrary  to   history.   Historically, he   said,   the   origin   of   the   European  state  has   been  in property-holding;  every  country  belongs  to   a  prince,  a   Church, or  a   corporation,  and  the   people   are  only   a   body   of   tenants settled  on  the   land.  Even  if   the   people   should  disappear,  the state  would  continue;  the   prince   would  only   have  to   procure  new subjects  to   adorn  his   estates.  The   state   being   a   private   estate,  the prince   was  an  absolutely  independent  proprietor;  he   charged  his personal  servants  to   govern  the   people   of   his   estate;   he   charged his   soldiers  to   defend  them;   he   paid   expenses  with  his   personal revenue.  The  aim  of   the   state  is   the   prince   and  his   family. The  subjects  are  not  citizens,  they   have  no  right   to   busy   themselves with   affairs   of   the   state;   they   must  either   obey   or   leave   the country.  This  book  was  received  with  enthusiasm  by   the   Prince Royal   of   Prussia.  The   absolutist  doctrine  was  that  of   the   Prussian and   Austrian  nobles,  the   majority  of   the   German  princes, ministers,  and   clergy.  The  absolutists  were  naturally  hostile  to the   press  and  to   university  education,  which  they   accused  of propagating  ideas  of   resistance  and  constraint  of   the   sovereign.

The  party  of   historic  rights   did   not  contest  the   prince's   sovereignty; they   scorned  written  constitutions,  as  contrary  to   tradition, and   recognised  only   rights   established  by   custom;  but under  this   title   they   demanded  the   re-establishment  of   the   old assemblies  of   estates  that   voted  the   taxes  and   controlled  the   provincial administration.  They   were  a   liberal  aristocratic  party, admirers  of   the   Tory   government.  Their  principal  representatives were   Germans  of   the   north,   university  professors:  Niebuhr,

professor  at   Bonn,  who  condemned  the  French  Revolution; Dahlmann,  professor  at   Kiel,   secretary  of   the   Holstein  nobility in   their   struggle  against   their   sovereign,  the   King   of   Denmark. (See   chap,   xviii.)  The  historic  rights   party,  the  one  which the   German  historians  now  regard  with  most  respect,  was  then the   smallest,  most  scattered,  and  least  popular  and  influential with  the   masses.

The  constitutional  party,  on  the  contrary,  invoked  natural rights   and   sovereignty  of   the   people;   they   demanded  a   constitution which  should  guarantee  to   citizens  freedom  against  abuse of   power   by   officials  and   clergy,   and   legal   equality  against   the pretensions  of   the   aristocracy;  they   wanted  a  government  controlled by   the   nation's  representatives,  masters  of   legislation  and taxation.  They   were  a   liberal  democratic  party,  admirers  of   the French  Revolution.  The  members  were  chiefly  Germans  of   the south  and  west  who  had  experienced  the  rule  or   influence  of France.  German  historians  to-day,  with  scornful  pity,   reproach this   party   with   having   been   the   dupe   of   revolutionary Utopians,  at   variance  with  history.  But   this   party,   though   afterward ridiculed,  comprised  almost  all   the   cultivated  and   literary Germans  of   the  day.   Its   most  popular  representatives  were Rotteck,  professor  at   the   University  of   Freiburg,  and   Welcker, authors  of   a   "   Universal  History."  Rotteck  ("   On   Assemblies of   Estates,"  1819)   declared  that   to   the   people   belongs   the   sovereignty by   reason  of   natural  rights;   the   government  is   simply   its delegate,  the  state  assemblies  ,   represent  the   people   and   must exercise  the   powers  that   the   nation  has   reserved  to   itself.

Public  opinion  in   favour  of   a   constitution  grew  so  strong  that the   princes   of   South  Germany  decided  to   grant   written  constitutions and   to   introduce  the   constitutional  system   into   all   their states.  The  people  then  had  to   improvise  a  staff  of   deputies, without  parliamentary  pay.   The   country  was  too  poor   to   furnish them;  there  were  few   great   landowners,  few   manufacturers,  few lawyers.  Government  office-holders  at  this  time  were  almost the   only   members  of   the   educated  classes,  and   the   voters  had   to choose  many  of   their  representatives  from  among  them.  These deputies,  who  were  also   office-holders,  found  themselves  in   a   contradictory position,   between  the   duty   of   obeying   their   government and   that   of   defending   the   interests  of   their   constituents.  It was  admitted  that  an  office-holder  elected  to   the   Chamber  might keep   his   liberty   of   opinion   and   divide  his   allegiance,  obeying   the government  in   his   executive  capacity,  opposing  it   in   his   legislament

tive   capacity;  and   the   opposition  was  composed,  or  at   least  controlled, by   office-holders.  The  government  often  profited  by   this to   intimidate  the   opposition  by   threats,  or  even  employed  a   more direct  process,  refusing  to   give   them  leave  of   absence  to   sit   in the   Chamber.

Between  the  absolutists  and  constitutionalists  the   opposition was  complete  and  plainly  irreconcilable.  The  absolutists  trusted in   Metternich,  the   declared  opponent  of   any  change   of   any   constitution, and   of   popular   representation;  they   naturally  sympathized with   Austria.  The   liberals  would  have  been  glad   to rest  on   Prussia,  Austria's  rival,   but   the   King   of   Prussia  was  an absolutist  who  had  broken  his   promise  to   give   his   own  people a  constitution.  (See   chap,   xiv.)   The  liberals  therefore  came to   detest  Prussia  even  more  than  Austria.  Heine  said  that  Metternich was   at   least   a   loyal   enemy,  while  the   King   of   Prussia  was a   hypocritical  enemy.  The  constitutionalists  could  look  for   no other  support  than  that  of   the   princes  of   South  Germany  or  of foreigners;  they   therefore  became  particularists  and  admirers  of the   French  (which   has   drawn  down  upon   them  the   scorn  of   German historians). ternich man

The  educated  Germans  found  themselves  drawn  in   two  directions. They   wanted  a   liberal,   united  Germany :   now  the   only   states strong  enough  to   bring   about  a  union  were  opposed  to   liberty; the   liberal  regime   could  be   established  only   in   the   small  states. Patriotism  drew  the   Germans  toward  union,  but   liberalism  drew them  toward  independence  for   the   smaller  states.  The  national movement  was  not   in   harmony  with  the   liberal  movement.  So political  life   in   Germany  was  very  confused  until  1848.   It   turned on  conflicts  between  the   subjects  and   their  own  particular  governments, between   the   subjects   and   the   federal  government,  between the   state  governments  and  the   federal  government.  This period  is   rilled   with   small  and   unimportant  events,  interesting rather   for   the   history   of   ideas   and   literature  than   for   political   history. Three   attempts  at   reform  were  made,   all   put   down  by   the governments.

University  Persecution.- The  "War  of   Liberation"  against France  had   produced  a   patriotic  movement  among  the   students. Many  of   them  had   enlisted  in   the   German  armies.  After  the victory  they   vaguely  hoped   to   see  the   old   united  Germany  reestablished under   liberal   forms.  Absolutism  and   cutting   up into   little   states  they   considered  a   mistake.  This  discontent  and desire   for   national  unity   produced  different  manifestations  :   gym-

nasties,  the   Burschenschaft,  secret  societies,  and   all   sorts  of   childish and   aimless  manifestations,  whose  importance  the   governments concerned  wilfully   exaggerated,  using   them  as   bugbears to   frighten  the   friends  of   order.  Hence  the   disproportionate position  that   they   occupy   in   the   attention  of   contemporaries,  and still   occupy   in   German  histories.

1.   Gymnastics  were  a   form  of   patriotism:  their  object   was  to prepare  robust  generations  for  the   defence  of   their  country. This  idea  was  embodied  in   a   person  regarded  with  a   mixture  of mockery  and  respect,  Jahn,   a   Prussian  peasant  belonging  to   the light   infantry  of   Lutzow,  who  after  the   war  opened  at   Berlin  a school  for   gymnastics.     He   had  come  to   Paris  with  a   knotty stick,   long   hair,   and   bare   neck,   for   "   the   linen   cravat  did   not   suit the   free   German."     He   used  great   familiarity  with  his   pupils, slapped  their  faces  to  awaken  their  thoughts,  and  made  them exercise  in   jackets   of   raw   linen,   with   long   hair   and   bare  necks. In   vacations  he   took  them  off,   each  shouldering  an  axe,  making them  camp  at   night,   and  feeding  them  on   bread  and  milk.     If they   met  a   dandy   dressed  in   the   French  fashion,  or  an   inscription in   French,  they   circled  about  it,   pointing  and   groaning.     For Jahn   had  a   horror  of   France;  he   would  have  liked  to   separate Germany  from  it   by   a  vast  forest  peopled  with  monsters.     He avoided  every  word  of   French  extraction,  and  used  only   Germanic words.     His   disciples   formed  a   "   society   for   the   German language,"    which    replaced    French    words    by    their    German equivalents:   Universitdt  became  Vernunftturnplatz  (gymnasium of   reason).     Jahn   had   no&gt;   further  political  ideas,   and   almost  all his   pupils   came  from  among  young  men  educated  in   the   secondary schools.

2.   The   Burschenschaft  was   an   association   of    students,   designed to   cultivate  among  its   members  religious  sentiment,  virtuous principles,  and   patriotic  devotion.     The   Burschen  (comrades) wore  a   sombre  costume  with  a   high   collar,   "   the   Germanic-Christian dress   "  ; they   had   adopted  the   colours  of   the   volunteers of   1813,   red,   black,   and   gold;   they   met  to   sing   patriotic songs.      They   had   organized  themselves  on  a  new  principle  in the   German  universities.     The  former  associations    (which  still exist  in    all    the    German   universities),   as   their   official   name (Landtnannschaft)  indicates,  were  simply   little  groups  of   students from  the   same  province  who  met  for   amusement,  to   drink  together, and   fight   duels,   without  any   idea   beyond.      The   Burschenschaft now   became  a   general   association  of   all   German  students rades)

and  contributed  to   the   formation  of   national  sentiment.  It   was founded  after  1815   at   Jena,   and   chiefly   by   students  from  the small  states  of   central  Germany.  The  Grand  Duchy  of   SaxeWeimar  had  become  the   centre  of   the   national  liberal  movement since  the   Grand  Duke  had   granted  his   people   a   constitution  and freedom  of   the   press;  the   principal  political  organs  were  published there  :   the   Nemesis,  the   I sis,   and   the   Oppositionsblatt.  Jena, the  University  of   the   Grand  Duchy,  and  Weimar,  the   Grand Duke's  residence,  were  then  the   centres  of   intellectual  political activity  in   Germany.

The  professors  and   the   liberal  journalists  of   the   Grand  Duchy organized  a   festival  at   the   Wartburg,  October,  1817,   for   the   joint celebration  of   the   religious  anniversary  of   the   Reformation  and the   patriotic   anniversary  of   the   battle  of   Leipzig.  It   was  an  official festival  with  delegates  from  the   universities,  authorized  by   the government  of   Weimar;  Luther's  hymn   was  sung,  and  the   professors made   speeches   that   could   hardly   be   called  political.  But in   the   evening  the   students  lighted   a   bonfire,  some  of   Jahn's students  threw  old   books  in   the   flames,  at   the   same  time  shouting the   names  of   the   works  their   leader  most  disliked,  those  of Kotzebue  and  Haller,  the   Napoleonic  code,  and  the  Prussian code  of   mounted  police.  They   added  as  military  symbols  a   belt from  the   uniform  of   the   Prussian  guard,   a   Hessian  soldier's  queue, and   the   baton  of   an   Austrian  corporal,  and   burned  them,   shouting: "   Pere,   Pereat!  "   (a   student's  refrain  answering  to   "   To with!").

This  childish  performance  was  talked  of   all   over  Germany,  and in   the   political   stagnation  of   the   time  it   had   the   look   of   a   student revolt  against  the   authorities.  Metternich  represented  it   as  a product  of   the   Revolution.  A   Roumanian  seigneur,  Stourdza, denounced  the   universities  to   the   Tsar  as   hotbeds  of   conspiracy. The  Grand  Duke  of   Weimar  was  obliged  to  establish  a   censorship of   the   press   in   his   state.

3.   Secret  societies  were  in   fashion  all   over  Europe.  The oldest  in   Germany,  the   famous  Tugendbund,  formed  in   Prussia about  1809   to   resist  the   French,  had   been  ordered  to   disband  by the   Prussian  government,  but   Metternich  still  spoke   of   it   as  a powerful  association.  He   wished  to   embarrass  Prussia  by   giving it   the   name  of   a  nest  of   revolutionists.  After  1815   secret societies  in   Germany  were  few   and  short-lived;  even  the   Free Masons  were  inactive  there.  The  only   society  that  seems  to have   been   purely   political   had   its   headquarters  at   Giessen,  uni-

versity   town  of   a  small  state,   Hesse-Darmstadt;  it   had   formulated a   constitution  based  on   the   sovereignty  of   the   people. Sand,   the   melancholy  student-lunatic  who  assassinated  Kotzebue, the   Tsar's  emissary,  was  a   member  of   this   society.  A   Nassau student  of   pharmacy  attempted  to  assassinate  the   head  of   the government  of   Nassau  (1819).*

This  system  was  perfected  at   the   Conference  of   Vienna  (1820). Metternich  would  have  liked  even  to   abolish  the   liberal  constitutions of   the   southern  states  as  contrary  to   the   Act   of   Confederation. He   dared   not   suggest   it,   but   he   secured  an  adjustment  of reciprocal  rights   of   the   states  of   the   Confederation  by   this   clause: "   As   the   Confederation  consists  of   sovereign  princes,  the   whole power  of   the   state  should  remain  vested  in   the   head  of   the   state, and  the   sovereign  cannot  be   bound  by   a  state  legislature  when acting   as  a   member  of   the   federation,  except   in   the   exercise  of determined  rights."  They   dared  not  close  the   debates  of   the Chambers  to   the   public,   but   they   decided  that   "   the   legal   limits  to the   free   expression  of   opinion  must  not   be   exceeded  either  in debate  or   in   publications  in   such  a   way  as   to   endanger  the   peace of   the   particular  state  or  of   Germany."  There  was  also   talk   of destroying  or  annulling  the   last   remaining  organ  of   political  life, the   representative  assembly. tion.

These  isolated  crimes  were  used  by   Metternich  to   frighten  the governments,  by   convincing  them  of   the   existence  of   a  widespread conspiracy,  and   to   induce  them  to   join   in   measures  of suppression.  Delegates  from  the   principal  governments  met  at Carlsbad  and  made  decisions  which  the   Federal  Assembly  ratified in   four  days;   these  were  the   Carlsbad  decrees  (1819).  The German  princes  who  had  refused  to   make  any  arrangements  for the   common  interests  of   their  people,  accepted  without  discussion a   common  action  against  the   enemies  of   the   monarchy - the universities,  the   press,  and   the   liberals.  The   decrees  authorized the   princes  to   dissolve  the   Burschenschaft  and  the   gymnastic societies,  to   establish  curators  in   each  university  to   oversee  the students  and   professors,  and   to   establish  a   censorship  to   examine every  newspaper  and  pamphlet  before  allowing  them  to   be printed.  A   federal  committee  of   seven  members  was  appointed, to  sit   at   Mainz  and   organize  an   inquiry  into   "   the   origin   and ramifications  of   revolutionary  conspiracies  and   demagogic  associations."

*   Treitschke,  deceived  by   the   false  account  given   by   Muench,  believed ';here  was  a   revolutionary  conspiracy.

## 386  GERMANY  BEFORE    THE    UNION.

The  committee  of   Investigation  discovered  no  conspiracy  whatever, not   even  a   criminal  act,   except   a   small   pamphlet.  But   the governments,  especially  in   Prussia,  imprisoned  and   condemned to   confinement  in   fortresses  a   number  of   students  who   had   sung patriotic  songs  or  worn  the   black,   red,   and   gold   colours,  and   even a   collegian  for   having   drawn  a   picture   of   a   devil   eating   a   king.

The   Opposition  of   the   Constitutional  States  of   the   South. - Since the   Conference  of   Vienna  the   governments  of   the   southern  states had  protested  against   the   plan   of   suppressing  the   constitutions. They   presented  themselves  as   the   defenders  of   political  liberty against  the   two  great  absolutist  states,  Austria  and  Prussia. The  movement  was  directed  by   Wangenheim,  who  represented the   King   of   Wurtemburg  in   the   Diet.  The  Manifesto  of   Southern Germany,   published  in   1820   by   order  of   the   King   of   Wurtemburg, was  supposed  to   be   the   manifesto  of   this   party.   The leading  idea  is   that  the   true  Germany  is   the   Germany  of   the Middle  Ages  - the   old   duchies  west  of   the   Elbe;   Austria  and Prussia  are  only   half   German  colonies.  The  Confederation  has done  wrong  to   assure  the   domination  of   these  two   half   foreign and  absolutist  powers  over  true  liberal  Germans;  it   should  give the   power  to   old   Germany.

The  contest  between  the   liberal  governments  of   the   southwest and  the  great  eastern  states  was  carried  into  the  Federal Assembly.  At   first  the   southern  states  secured  the   adoption  of the   military  regulation  of   1821,   dividing  the   German  army   into independent  bodies,  against  the   King   of   Prussia,  who  demanded the   command  of   the   northern  contingents.  Then  the   Wurtemburg delegate   openly   protested  against   the   Mainz  committee  of investigation,  the   decisions  of   the   Congress  of   Verona,  and   the absolutist  elector  of   Hesse.  The  governments  of   the  large states,  wearied  with   this   opposition,  finally   withdrew  their  envoys from  the   court  of   Wurtemburg;  the   King   became  alarmed  and recalled  Wangenheim.  The  opposition  ceased.  The  govern^ ments  reorganized  the  Federal  Diet  and  decided  that  debates should  not   be   published.  Then  the   delegates  from  the   German princes  met  at   Johannisberg,  in   Metternich's  castle,  and   drew  up resolutions  which  the   Diet   voted  in   August,   1824.   Not   only   did they   renew  the   decrees  of   1819   against   the   press  and   the   universities, but   they   empowered  themselves  to  oversee  the  state assemblies  and   prevent  their  "   threatening  monarchical  prin- ciples." After  this   the   Diet   met   but   seldom  until  1830.      The   news-

papers  were  forbidden  any  political  discussions;  people   did   not dare  talk  politics.  German  attention,  turned  aside  from  home affairs,   directed  itself  to   foreign   countries,  Greek  insurgents  and French  liberals.

Movements  of   1830. - From  1815   to  1830   the   opinions  of   educated Germans  had   been   transformed;  they   had   lost   their   horror of   France  and  Napoleon;  they   detested  the   absolutist  powers, Austria  and  Prussia,  and  transferred  their  enthusiasm  to  the nations  that  defended  their  liberty,  especially  to   France  and Poland.  Rotteck  said  that  in   case  of   conflict  between  constitutional France  and   the   absolutist  states  of   Germany,  all   liberal Germans  would  side  with  France.  They   were  less  interested  in German  unity   than  in   political  liberty.  They   wanted  especially the   institutions  of   free   countries,  legislative  chambers  controlling the   budget,  freedom  of   the   press,   jury   trial,   a   national  guard which  would  place   force  in   the   hands  of   the   people.  There  were even  republicans  like  Borne  and   Heine,  both  of   whom  admired France  and   hated  Prussia.

The  Revolution  of   1830   encouraged  the   German  liberals;  in the   small  states  where  the   government  was  worst  they   organized demonstrations,  and  frightened  the   princes  into   granting  constitutions in   Brunswick,  Hesse-Cassel  (1831),  Saxony,  Hanover, and  in   two   Saxon  duchies.  In   the   constitutional  states  of   the south,  especially  in   Baden  and   Bavaria,  political  interest  revived and  censorship  was  relaxed;  there  even  appeared  democratic publications  supporting  the   Polish  rebels  against  the   Tsar.

This  liberty   lasted  until  the   governments  felt   themselves  in danger.  In   1832,   after   the   suppression  of   the   Polish  government, they   felt   reassured;  the   Diet   condemned  the   abuses  of   the   press and  put   down  several  liberal  organs.  The  democrats,  for   the purpose  of   resisting  the   coalition  of   princes,  founded  a   Press Union  with  the   object   of   indemnifying  persecuted  journalists  and spreading  the   plan   of   an  agreement  for   the   establishment  of   a German  Empire  with  a   democratic  constitution.  The  centre  of the   movement  was  situated  in   a  country  adjoining  France,  the Bavarian  Palatinate.  The  Union  distributed  pamphlets,  held meetings,  and   organized  the   "German  May"   festival  at   Hambach Castle  (May   27,   1832).  A   great   crowd  gathered,  including  Poles and   Frenchmen;  from  the   great  tower  floated  the   red,   black,   and gold   flag   (the   Burschenschaft  flag,   now  become  the   symbol  of German  unity)   and  from  a   turret  the   Polish  flag.   There  were songs,  speeches,  toasts  to   the   Fatherland,  the   sovereignty  of   the

people,  the   United  States  of   Germany,  and   Republican  Europe. The  Hambach  festival,  like  the   previous  one  at   the   Wartburg, was  used  by   Metternich  to   frighten  the   Diet   into   voting   the   decrees of   1832.  This  time  he   secured  what  had  always  been refused  him  before :   a   federal  committee  was  appointed  to   oversee the   Chambers  of   Deputies;  the   Diet  declared  void  in   advance every  constitutional  plan   which  threatened  monarchical  principles and  promised  armed  intervention  in   every  state  where  the   subjects refused   to   pay   taxes.  It   forbade  political   societies,  meetings, liberty-trees,   cockades,  and   other  emblems  of   liberty;   it   renewed the   decrees  of   1819   and   1824.   It   annulled  the   press   law of   the   Grand  Duchy   of   Baden  as  contrary  to   federal  decisions. The  government  of   Baden  tried  to   defend  itself;   it   asked  help   of Louis  Philippe,  but   failed  to   get   it,   and   finally   changed   the   press law.  In   Wurtemburg,  Hesse,  and  Nassau  the   Chambers  were dissolved  and   the   liberal  publications  suspended. ings,

The  liberal  party   broke  up   on  the   question  of   future  policy. The  moderate  liberals  wanted  to  continue  their  opposition  by legal   methods.  The  radicals  were  labouring  to  overthrow  the absolutist  governments  with  the   aid   of   French  and   Polish  revolutionists; they   formed  secret  societies  which  were  joined   by students  and  subordinate  military  officers.  The  conspirators were  counting  on  aid   from  the   Polish  refugees  of   Besanqon  and the   Alsatian  national  guard.  A   mob  of   fifty   men  attempted  to seize  Frankfort,  the   seat  of   the   Federal  Diet  (April,   1833),   and were  scattered  or  arrested.

This  gave  rise   to   a   new   form  of   persecution.  The   Diet  appointed a   central  committee,  which  lasted  until  1842,   to   oversee the   investigations  aimed  against   the   revolutionists,  forbade  the publication  of   political  debates,  and   the   entrance  of   any   person into   Germany  or   Switzerland  without  a  passport.  Metternich declared  that   the   root  of   the   evil   was   in   "   the   faction  which  was seeking  to   introduce  in   the   form  of   the   representative  system the   modern  idea   of   popular   sovereignty."  He   would  have  liked to   establish  a   federal  police;   the   individual  governments  found their   own  police   sufficient.

In   Prussia,  twenty-nine  students  were  condemned  to   death, and   their   sentences  later   commuted  to   imprisonment  in   fortresses. One  of   them,   Fritz  Reuter,  has   told   the   story   of   his   captivity  in Low  German  dialect  in   a   famous  romance.  In   Hesse,  Jordan, the   leader  of   the   liberals  in   the   Chamber,  was  arrested  and   detained six   years  in  prison   without  trial,   then   tried  and   acquitted.

In   Baden,  Rotteck  and   Welcker  were  suspended  from  their  professorships. In   Bavaria,  a   journalist,  after  four  years  of   preventive imprisonment,  was  condemned  to   make  a   public   apology before  the   King's   portrait  and   to   suffer  indefinite  confinement  for reprinting  a  certain  article  from  another  paper.

This  persecution  crushed  liberal  agitation  and   political  interest in   Germany.  From  1833   to   1847   there  was  no   further  political incident,  except   in   1837   the   affair  of   the   seven  professors.  The King   of   Hanover  had  abrogated  the   Constitution  of   1833   because it   prevented  his   paying  his   debts  with  state  funds;  seven professors  of   Gottingen  declared  themselves  bound  to   the   constitution by   their  oath  of   allegiance;  the   King   deprived  them  of their  positions;  a  society  was  founded  at   Leipzic  to   raise  subscriptions for   them  all   over   Germany.

The  National  Movement  since  1840. - The  Diet,   the   only   institution common  to   all   Germany,  had   manifested  its   activity   only by   persecutions,  and   had   created  nothing  but   a   political  police; it   therefore  became  hateful  to   educated  Germans.  The  idea  of replacing  it   by   a   real   national  government  had   been  expressed  by several  isolated  writers:  Gagern  of   Hesse,  a   delegate  to   the   Diet in   1815;   Welcker  of   Baden;  Pfizer  of   Wurtemburg.  Their  sentiments and   wishes  were  summed  up   in   these  two  sentences: "   Nationality  is   the   first   condition  of   humanity,  as   the   body   is   the condition  of   the   soul   "   (Pfizer).  The   "   Confederation  of   States  " (Staatenbund),  united  by   too   loose  a   bond,   must  give  place   to   a "   Federal  State  "   (Bundcsstaaf),  strongly  united.*  Pfizer  added that  this   new  state  must  be   directed  by   the   King   of   Prussia assisted  by   an  elective  parliament.  This  dream  of   national  unity agreed  with  the  desire  of   Prussian  office-holders  to   increase Prussia's  power   (expressed  by   minister  Bernstorff  in   a   memorial to   the   King   in   1831).

In   1840   an   incident  in   European  politics   was  made  the   occasion of   a   manifestation  of   German  patriotism.  The  four  great powers,  the   old   "   Allies  "   of   1815,   had   just   united  against   France to   settle  the   Eastern  question.  In   the   French  Chamber  there was  talk  of   breaking  the   treaties  of   1815   and   even  of   reconquering the   Rhine  boundary.  This  produced  an  agitation  against

*   As   early   as   1818  the   French  ambassador  Reinhard,  in   a   report  to   his government,  said:  "   It   is   of   European  importance  that  Germany  should be   united  by   a   bond  that  can  resist  the   demands  of   the   moment.  That does  not  seem  to   me  possible,  until  the   confederation  of   the   German  states shall   become  a   federal  state,"

France  in   Germany,  in   the   form  of   patriotic  songs  ; it   was  at   this time  that   Becker's  German  Rhine  was  composed  ("   They   shall   not have  our  free  German  Rhine  ")   and   immediately  sung  all   over Germany,  and  the   Wacht  am   Rhein,   which  remained  unnoticed  for thirty   years,  when  it   became  the   national  anthem  in   the   war  of 1870.  The  patriotic  movement  won  even  the   princes;  Becker received  a   pension  from  the   King   of   Prussia  and   an  order  from the   King   of   Bavaria.  The   Diet   decided  to   draw  up   the   regulation of   the   Federal  army.  In   1842   the   placing  of   the   last   stone of   the   Cologne  Cathedral  was  made  a   national  festival  of   princes under  the   presidency  of   the   King   of   Prussia;  the   King   of   Wur- temburg  proposed  a   toast  to   "   our   fatherland." Among  the  university  professors  public   life   took  the   form  of aspirations  toward  unity.  The  Germanist  Congress  held  at Frankfort  in   1846   was  at   once  a   meeting   of   scholars  (philologists, historians,  and  jurists)   and  an  assembly  of   patriots;  they   discussed national  questions   and   a   German  parliament.  There  was also  a   professor,  Gervinus,  who  in   1847   founded  at   Heidelberg the   Deutsche  Zeitung,  a   political   newspaper,  liberal  and   national, designed  for   all   Germany.

The  meeting  of   the   Prussian  "   United  Landtag  "   in   1847   at length   gave   the   largest   of   the   German  states  a   means  of   taking part   in   politics   (see   chap.   xiv).   The   Chambers  of   the   southern states,   benumbed  by   the   decrees  of   1834,   became  active  once more.  The  southern  liberals  put   themselves  in   relations  with those  of   Prussia.  But,   as   in   1832,   upon  the   course  to   pursue they   could  not  agree.

The  democratic  radicals,  who  had  their  centre  at   Mannheim, in   Baden,  held   an  assembly  (September  12,   1847)   at   Offenburg, and   adopted  as   their   platform  liberty   of   the   press  and   of   association, jury   trial,   national  guard,   progressive  taxation,  military oath  of   allegiance  to  the  constitution,  and  a  representative assembly  of   the   people   by   the   side   of   the   Diet.

The   moderate  constitutionalists,  meeting  at   Heppenheim  October 10,   decided  simply  to   lay   before  the   Chambers  of   the   individual states   resolutions  calling   for   the   creation  of   a   German parliament.

The   Kevolution  of   1848  in   Germany. - The   national  movement suddenly  developed  into  revolution  through  the  example  of France.  (There  was  a  small  local  revolt  in   Bavaria  early   in February,  1848.)  At   the  news  of   the  Paris  revolution,  the liberals  organized  public   metings,  and   demanded  liberty   of   the

## THE  FRANKFORT  PARLIAMENT.  39!

press,   the   parliamentary  system,  and   a   German  parliament.  The governments  were  stupefied  and  dared  not  resist  them.

The  advocates  of   unity   took  advantage  of   this   confusion  to   attempt the   transformation  of   Germany  into   a-   federal  state.  The movement,  as  usual,  came  from  the   south,  the   state  of   Baden; 51   liberals  met  at   Heidelberg  (March  5),   decided  to  call  an assembly  to   draft  schemes  of   reform,  and   appointed  a   committee of   seven  members.

The  committee  of   seven  called  together  at   Frankfort  the   Vorparlamcnt,  or  preparatory  parliament,  composed  of   all   the   men who  had   sat   as   deputies  in   a   German  chamber;  from  five   to   six hundred  of   them  came,  most  of   them  from  the   south  (as   it   was the   southern  states  especially  that   had   chambers),  some  Prussians and  a   few   Austrians.

The  Diet  continued  to   sit,   but   the   governments  had   replaced their  delegates  by   popular  men  who  aided  the   liberal  cause.  It adopted  the   insignia  of   the   national  party:  the   red,   black,   and gold   standard  of   the   Burschenschaft,  now  become  the   official  flag of   Germany  (March  9).   It   accepted  all   the   propositions  of   the Vorparlament,  and  transformed  them  into  decisions  which  the governments  executed.  It   convoked  a  genuine  parliament,  to be   elected  in   the   proportion  of   I   deputy   to   each  50,000   inhabitants, from   all   the   German  states,  not  simply   those  that   had formed  the   Confederation,  but  even  the  German  provinces  of Prussia  and  Austria  outside  of   the   Confederation  (Silesia,  western and   eastern  Prussia,  the   German  districts  of   Posnania,  and Bohemia).  In   spite   of   its   English  name,  the   parliament  was  a Constitutional  Convention  (constituante)  in   imitation  of   France, elected  by   universal  suffrage  and   convoked  for   the   express  purpose of   ordaining  the   German  constitution.

The  Frankfort  Parliament. - The  electors  chose  the   leaders  of the   former  liberal  and   national  oppositions,  a   large   number  of whom  were  professors  and  writers.  The  parliament  came together  at   Frankfort,  the   seat  of   the   Diet,   and   held   its   meetings in   St.   Paul's  Church.  It   was  supposed  to   have  605   members; but   the   Czechs  of   Bohemia  had   refused  to   send  delegates  to   a German  assembly - so  there  were  only   586   deputies.  The  Prussian provinces  had,   on   the   contrary,  sent  their   delegates.

It   was  a   tumultuous  assemblage;  the  deputies  had   had  no experience  in   debate;  they   all   wanted  to   present  their  plans;   the president,  Gagern,  the   old   champion  of   unity,   did   not   know  how to   maintain  order;  he   was  perpetually  wrangling  with  members

and  allowed  the  galleries  to  applaud  or  make  noisy   protestation.

The  parliament  found  itself  in   an  unprecedented  situation  : having met   for   the   final   organization  of   the   German  government  in the   name  of   the   German  people,   it   had   only   a   moral  authority; the   old   governments  all   remained  standing  and  retained  their strength.  This  contradiction  between  its   functions  and   its   means of   action  rendered  it   powerless:  it   resembled  a  congress  of scholars  discussing  constitutional  theories;  it   could  propose plans,   but   the   governments  alone  could  decide  upon  them.

It   began   by   organizing  a  provisional  federal  government  to replace  the   Diet,   now   become  irremediably  unpopular.  The  discussion was   stormy,   with   9   projects  and   189   orators.  The   proposition 'made   by   the   committee  to   create  a   directory  of   three members  appointed  by   the  governments  was  rejected,  as  well as   the   republican  project   for   an  executive  committee  elected  by the   Assembly;  the   project  of   certain  Prussian  deputies  to   give the   provisional  government  to   the   King   of   Prussia  was  received with  "   general   hilarity   "   and   not  even   discussed.  After  six   days' discussion,  the   president  proposed  to   choose  a   prince;   the   parliament created  an   "   Imperial  Administrator,"  and  elected  the   most popular  of   the   German  princes,  the   Austrian  Archduke  John,   by a   large   majority.  The  Diet  transmitted  its   powers  to   him  and was  dissolved. sition

Archduke  John   formed  an   imperial  ministry  (justice,  interior, foreign  affairs,  war,   finances,  and   commerce),  which  began   to govern  according  to  the   parliamentary  system.  Parties  in   the parliament  began  to   be   classified,  and  they   were  organized  in groups  designated  by   the   names  of   the   places   where  they   held their  meetings.  They   numbered  eleven.  The  largest  parties were  the   two   Centres - the   Right   Centre,   of   about  120  members, the   ministerial  party,   formed  mainly   of   North  Germans,  divided into  "Casino"  and  "Landsberg";  the  Left  Centre,  formed mainly  of   South  Germans,  divided  into  "   the  Wurtemburg Hotel  "   and   "   the   Augsburg  Hotel."

The  Right  was  cut   into  three  groups:  the   North  Germans, Protestants,  at   the   Milan  Cafe ;   the   South  Germans,  Catholics,  at the   Stone  House;  the   Austrians,

The   200   Republican  deputies  formed  two  parties :   the   Moderate Left,  divided  into  "   Westendhall  "   and  "   the  Nuremberg Hotel";  the   Radical  Left,   divided  into  "the  German  House" and   "   Donnersberg."

The  two  centres,  together  with  the   unclassified  members  (the Wilde,  or  savages),  had   a   small  majority.

The  parliament,  charged  with  the   organization  of   the   German federal  state,   began   to   discuss  the   constitution.  It   had   to   solve three  general  practical  questions:  i.   What  should  be   the   form  of the   federal  government?  2.   What  countries  should  enter  the federal  state?  3.   To   what  prince   should  the   federal  power   be intrusted?  There  was  no  majority  except  on  the   first  question; it   was  agreed   to   settle  it   at   once,   beginning  with  the   "   fundamental rights   "   (Grundrechte)  of   German  citizens.  The  liberals predominated;  they   secured  the   adoption  of   the   principles  of   the Belgian  Constitution,  the   model  of   liberal  constitutions  of   the period:  equality  before  the   law,   judicial   independence,  communal autonomy,  popular  representation  in   each  state,   freedom  of   the press,  of   association,  of   religion,  and   of   education.  After  three months'  discussion  the  project  was  carried  through  its   first stage   (October,  1848).*

·   During  this  time  the  ministry  ordered  the  soldiers  of   the federal  army  to   take  the   oath  of   allegiance  to   the   Imperial  Administrator (August   6)  ; the   majority  of   the   governments  did   not obey   it.   The   parliament,  by   a   majority  of   238   against   221,   decided to   interfere  against  Denmark  in   favour  of   the   Germans  of Holstein  (September  5),   which  led   to   the   dismissal  of   the   ministry, and   then   made   an  opposite   decision  by   a   majority   of   258 against  226   (September  16),   which  led   to   the   return  of   the   ministry. A   number  of   Republican  deputies  then  wished  to  take advantage  of   the   indignation  against  the   258   "   traitors  "   to   proclaim the   Republic   and   dissolve  the   parliament.  But   the   ministry summoned  the   Prussian  and  Austrian  troops,  and  the Republican  uprising  of   Frankfort  produced  nothing  but   the   assassination of   two  deputies  of   the   Right. istry

The  government  had  decided  to  replace  the  Confederation, with  its   absolutist  principles,  by   a   federal  state  with  a   liberal constitution;  it   had   begun   by   making  the   constitutional  plan   of new  Germany  before  fixing   its   limits  and   selecting  its   chief.  Two other  questions  remained:  What  territory  should  be   included? Who  should  exercise  the   central  power?  These  were  no  mere theoretical  definitions  of   rights;   two  practical  measures  must  be adopted,  and  neither  could  be   adopted  without  offending  one

*The  parliament  had  also  to  occupy  itself  with  a  particular  federal question,  the  affair  of   the  duchies  of   Schleswig-Holstein.  (See   chap, xviii.)

of   the   two  great   powers  that   were  in   control,  Austria  or   Prussia. The  centres  of   the   parliament,  after  having   worked  together  on constitutional  questions,  broke  apart  when  it   became  necessary to  choose  between  Austria  and  Prussia.  A   new  grouping  of parties   was  made.

The  question  of   territory  was   insoluble.  Neither  Austria  nor Prussia  was  exclusively  German.  The  parliament  decided  that foreign  provinces  could  not  enter  the   German  federal  state;  they could  be   joined   to   German  states  only   by   a   personal  union  (October 27).   This  decision,  without  satisfying  Austria,  irritated Prussia,  on  account  of   the   province  of   Posen.  But   the   insoluble difficulty  came  from  Austria,  whose  German  population  was  a decided  minority.  The  Austrian  government  was  unwilling  to break  up   the   Empire  by   separating  the   German  provinces  from the   Magyar,  Slav,   and   Italian  provinces.  It   wished  to   enter  the new  state  with  all   its   possessions;  it   therefore  asked  that  the parliament  should  "   leave  in   supense  "   Austria's  relations  with Germany  until  Austria  should  have  ordered  her  own  future, which  meant  not  to   make  the   constitution  of   the   whole  until  the Emperor  of   Austria  should  have  made  one  for   his   own  states. The  parliament  had   the   choice  of   two  solutions:  either  admit  the whole  Austrian  Empire  into  the  Confederation,  which  would have  meant  to  renounce  federal  unity   and  content  itself  with a   tie   sufficiently  loose  to   include  non-German  peoples;  or  to organize  a   federal  government  strongly  knit  together  and   leaving out   the   German  provinces  of   Austria,  which  would  be   to renounce  German  unity.

The  parliament  and  the   German  people  divided  into  two  parties. The   Great   Germany  (Gross   dent   sche)   party,   in   order  to   preserve German  unity,   resigned  themselves  to   union  with  Austria - the   traditional  sentiment  expressed  in   Arndt's  famous  patriotic song:   "What  is   the   German  fatherland?  ...  As   far   as  the German  tongue  is   heard."  They   could  not   imagine  a   German fatherlan'd  that   shut   out  the   Tyrolese  and   Austrians.  The   Little Germany  (Kleindeutsche)  party,   in   order  to   create  a  real   federal state,  resigned  themselves  to   the   reduction  of   territory  involved in   the   exclusion  of   Austria.  This  question  of   limitation  was allied  to   the   question  of   the   central  power.  If   the   German  Confederation should   admit   Austria,   it   could   have   no  other   head   than the   Emperor  of   Austria,  who  was  superior  in   title,   traditional rights,   and   in   the   importance  of   his   possessions;  if   the   federal state  should  be   constituted  without  Austria,  the   King   of   Prussia serve

alone  could  be   the   head.  Thus  the   Great  Germany  party   was  an Austrian  party,  the   Little  Germany  a   Prussian  party.

After  some  very   lively   contests  the   Prussian  party  prevailed. The  parliament,  by   261   votes  against   224,  authorized  the   imperial ministry  to  enter  into  diplomatic  relations  with  Austria,  thus declaring  that  Austria  was  considered  a   foreign  state.  The Centres  had   voted  for   Little  Germany,  the   extreme  Republicans and  the   Right   for   Great  Germany  (January  13,   1849).

The  execution  of   parliamentary  decisions,  however,  depended on   the   individual  governments.  The  King   of   Prussia  wanted  the Imperial  Crown,  but   he   wanted  to   receive  it   from  the   princes,   his equals,   not   from  an  assembly  of   subjects.  That  which  the   parliament was   offering   him   he   called   "   a   crown  of   mud  and   wood," and   said : "   If   anyone   is   to   award  the   crown  of   the   German  nation, it   is   myself   and   my   equals   who   shall   give   it."   He   officially   declared himself  unable  to   accept  until   he   should  have  conferred with  the   princes  and  examined  the   constitution.  The  parliament had   to   choose  between  the   constitution  and   the   King   of Prussia;  the   majority  decided  to   stand  by   the   constitution.  The King   asked  the   advice  of   the   other  governments.  Twenty-eight states  accepted  the   constitution,  the   hereditary  Empire,  and   the election;  the   four  Kings   (Bavaria,  Wurtemburg,  Saxony,  and Hanover)  rejected  the   election,  not  wishing  to   be   subject   to   the King  of   Prussia,  their  equal.  Austria  broke  openly  with  the parliament  and  withdrew  her  deputies.  The  King   of   Prussia was  alarmed  and   refused  the   Empire  absolutely  (April   28,   1849).

This  decision  involved  an  answer  to   the   last   question,  that   of the   central  power.  The  parliament  voted  by   a  majority  of   258 against  211:  "The  dignity  of   the   supreme  chief  of   the   Empire should  be   intrusted  to   one  of   the   reigning  German  princes,"  and by   a   majority  of   9   votes  only:   "   This  chief  shall  bear  the   title   of Emperor  of   the   Germans"  Two  months  later  the   government  of Austria  proposed  that  the  whole  Austrian  Empire,  with  its 30,000,000  inhabitants,  should  enter  the  Confederation,  and should  have  38   votes  against  32   for   all   the   rest  of   Germany.  A number  of   deputies,  indignant  at   this   officiousness,  left   the   Austrian party;   the   parliament  declared  the   Empire   hereditary,  and by   290   votes  elected  the   King   of   Prussia  to   be   Emperor  of   the Germans  (March  28).

The  parliament,  deserted  by   Prussia,  decided  (by   190   votes against   188)   to   promulgate  the   constitution  in   spite   of   the   princes, and   to   convoke  the   electors  for   July   15.   It   was  then   the   Repub-

licans  who  became  the   defenders  of   the   constitution  and   tried to   force  the   governments  to   recognise  it.   There  had   been  already two   Republican  insurrections  in   the   Grand  Duchy  of Baden  in   1848.  In   May,   1849,   there  were  risings   in   the   Kingdom of   Prussia  (Rhine  province,  Breslau,  and   Konigsberg),  the Kingdom  of   Saxony  (Dresden),  the   Grand  Duchy   of   Baden,  and the   Bavarian  Palatinate.  The  King   of   Saxony  and   the   Grand Duke  of   Baden  fled   and   asked  help   from  the   King   of   Prussia. The  Prussian  guard   took  Dresden  after  two   days'   righting.  The governments  recalled  their  deputies  from  Frankfort;  the   Imperialists retired;   only   the   determined  Republicans  remained.

The  parliament,  reduced  to  105   members,  almost  all   of   whom were  south  Germans,  moved  to   Stuttgart  (June   6),   and   elected an   Imperial  Regency  of   5   members.  But   it   soon  came  into   conflict with   the   government  of   Wurtemburg,  which  closed  the   hall and  dispersed  the   deputies.  The  Baden  insurgents  had  formed a   provisional  government  which  controlled  Baden  and  the   Palatinate; they   had  with  them  a  number  of   rebel  regiments.  A Prussian  army  arrived;  there  was  a  genuine  war;  the   insurgents were  conquered  and  dispersed;  the   councils  of   war   had   a   part   of the  prisoners  shot.  Many  Republicans  fled  to   Switzerland, France,  and  America.  This  repression  had  lasting  effect:  the Republican  party,  very  numerous  in   southern  Germany,  was  exterminated, and   has   never  been  entirely  reorganized.  (On   socialist parties   in   Germany  from  1848   to   1850,   see  chap,   xxiv.)

The  Prussian  Union. - The  attempt  to   establish  a   German  federal state   by   a   national  assembly  had  failed;  the   Prussian government  tried  to   revive  it   by   an  understanding  with  the   governments. It   had  now  prestige  in   the   eyes  of   the   princes   for having  fought  and  crushed  the  revolution.  It   was  free  from Austria,  which  was  absorbed  with  wars  in   Italy   and   Hungary. It   proposed  to   organize  a   provisional  government  and   to   revise the   constitution  voted  by   the   parliament  in   order  to   cut  out  the excessively  democratic  clauses.  This  was  all   discussed  at   the Conference  of   Berlin,  May   17,   1849.   But   again   the   same  question came  up   that   had   faced   the   parliament  :   What  should  be   the position  of   the   Emperor  of   Austria  in   the   new  state?  Prussia proposed  to   create  a   federative  state  headed  by   the   King   of Prussia,  who   would  later  conclude  a  wider  alliance  with  Austria. The  Austrian  government  immediately  retired.

The   two   North  German  Kings,  Hanover  and  Saxony,  not   daring to   refuse  openly,   concluded  a   one-year  alliance  with   Prussia,

The  Prussian  plan   of   constitution  established  a   government  with two  Chambers :   Chamber  of   the   states,  composed  of   160   delegates from  the  governments;  Chamber  of   the  people,  composed  of elective  deputies.  Seventeen  German  states  accepted  the   terms, but   the   two   Kings   of   Wurtemburg  and   Bavaria  refused  to   yield to   them.  The  Prussian  national  party,   however,  had  still  some hopes   of   seeing   the   union  realized.  One   hundred  and   fifty   former members  of   the   Centres  in   the   Frankfort  parliament  met  at Gotha,  to   come  to   an  agreement  on  a   plan   for   aiding   Prussia  by sacrificing  the   constitution  voted  in   1849.

But  the   King   of   Prussia  personally  hesitated  at   leaning  on an  elective  Assembly;  he   refused  to  convoke  a  parliament  in 1849,   and   lost   time   in   negotiation  with   the   governments.  Austria used   this   delay   to   end   her   Italian  and   Hungarian  wars,  and when  the   King   of   Prussia  decided  to   call   for   an  election,  the   two Kings  of   Saxony  and  Hanover,  encouraged  by   Austria,  protested; they   then   withdrew.  The  King   of   Prussia  tried  to   organize a   Union  with  the   little  states.  A   parliament  elected  by   the inhabitants  of   these  states  (January,  1850)   met  at   Erfurt  in March;  being   composed  of   advocates  of   the   Union,  it   voted  the constitution  which  the  Prussian  government  laid  before  it. Meanwhile  the   kingdoms  which  opposed  the   Union  proposed  an organization  which  should  include  Austria,  with  a   directory  of seven  members  and  a  parliament  with  an  equal   number  of   Austrian, Prussian,   and   German  delegates.  Austria  accepted,  Prussia refused  (February-March,  1850). ize

German  Reaction. - Now  that  Prussia  had  been  forced  to  renounce the   role   of   director,   Austria  proposed  to   the   German states,  that  the   whole  Austrian  Empire  should  come  into  the

The  Austrian  government  convoked  the  German  states  at Frankfort  to   reorganize  the   old   Diet.  Prussia  replied  by   convoking at   Berlin  a   congress  of   the   states  of   the   Union.  Meanwhile the   German  states  were  grouped  into  two  opposing leagues:  that  of   Berlin,  which  favoured  the   Prussian  party  and Little  Germany;  that  of   Frankfort,  which  favoured  the   Austrian party  and  Great  Germany.  But  one  by   one  the   states  deserted Prussia  and  joined  the  Frankfort  conference.  The  King   of Prussia,  threatened  with  war  with  Austria,  hesitated,  then  yielded. The  Austrian  government  exacted  the   formal  dissolution  of   the Union  (November  15,   1850).  Schwartzenberg  said  openly  that "   Prussia  must  be   degraded,  then  demolished."  (On   the   part played  by   Russia  and   the   Conference  of   Olmiitz,  see  chap,   xxvi.) while

Confederation.  The  Dresden  conference  made  a   pretence  of   discussing the   project;  but   the   German  princes   did   not   like   it,   and Austria  gave   it   up.   Finally   they   re-established  the   old   Confederation as   it   was   before  1848,   and   the   Diet,   meeting   as   formerly at   Frankfort  (May,   1851),   appointed  a  committee  to   study   the best  means  of   securing  domestic  peace   in   Germany.  This  "   reactionary committee,"  as   it   was  called,   recommended  a   revision of   the   new  constitutions  in   order  to   cut  out  all   revolutionary  tendencies: universal  suffrage   and   the   military   oath   of   allegiance  to the   constitution.

During  the   revolutionary  period   of   1848   several  governments had   adopted  democratic  constitutions,  extended  the   right   of   voting to   universal  suffrage,  established  jury   trial,   national  guard, and   freedom  of   the   press.   The   Diet  repealed  the   "   fundamental rights   "   voted  by   the   parliament  in   1849.   Then  the   government of   each   state  worked  systematically  to   restore  the   system  which had   been  in   existence  before  1848   (often   called  the   Vormarzische Zust'dnde,  the   system  prevailing  previous  to   March,  1848),   repressing the   liberal  customs  of   every  sort  which  their  subjects had  adopted  during  the  revolution.  This  reaction  consisted chiefly   of   press  prosecutions,  espionage  of   office-holders  and   suspected persons,   dissolution  of   the   Chambers,  official  pressure  on voters  and   in   the   Chambers,  bickerings  at   the   frontier,  passports, domiciliary  visits,   suppression  of   jury   trial,   special   courts,  government agents   hired   to   instigate   and   then   denounce  political offences,  etc.  The  governments  sought  allies  in   the   churches, favoured  professors  of   theology  and   orthodox  pastors,  and   placed the   schools  under  clerical  direction.

The   Diet,   as   before  1848,   was   directed  by   Austria.  But   the Austrian  government  had  changed  its   attitude  toward  Prussia. The   new   Prussian  envoy,   Bismarck,  described  his   experiences  at Frankfort  (1851-58)  in   a   report  which  has   since  become  famous (Report  on   the   necessity  of   inaugurating  an   independent  PrussoGerman  policy,   March,   "1858).   Previous  to   1848,   he   said,   Austria and   Prussia  worked  together  in   the   Diet   and   "   reduced  its   action to   a   small   number  of   unimportant  matters.  .   .   Matters  on  which they   did   not   agree  were  not   brought  forward.  .   .   Since  1851, debates  in   the   Diet   present  an  entirely   different  aspect.   Schwarzenberg  adopted  the   plan   of   securing  to   Austria  the   leadership of   Germany  by   the   means  that  the   Constitution  of   the   Confederation offered."   Bismarck  then   explained  the   methods  of   Austria's influence   over  the   German  princes,  over  manufacturers

and   financiers,  showing  how  she   is   assured  of   a   certain  majority in   the   Diet,   and   works  to   "   enlarge   the   sphere   of   the   instrument at   her   service  "   by   increasing  the   number  of   affairs  as   to   which decisions  may   be   taken  by   the   majority.

Thus  the  restored  Diet  served  Austria  as  an   instrument  to maintain  the   absolutist  system  against   the   liberals,  and   the   Confederation against   the   Prussian  government.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.- For  the  history  of   all   the  German  countries,  Germany, Prussia,   and   Austria,  it   is   always   safe   to   refer  to   Dahlmann-Waitz, "   Quellenkunde  der  Deutschen  Geschichte,"  6th  edition,  revised  by Steindorff,  1894,   the   best   of   all   the   national  historical  bibliographies.  For works  published  since  1893,   see  the   periodical  bibliography  published  as an  appendix  to   the   "   Deutsche  Zeitschrift  fur   Geschichtswissenschaft."*

DOCUMENTS.- The  official  documents  of   the  Diet  have  been  published by   Kluber,  1830-33,  G.   von   Meyer,  1821-27,  Zo'pfl,   1858-69;  the   constitutions of   the   individual  states,  by   Poelitz,  and   Bulau,  1832-47,  and   Zacharise,  185562. - For   parliamentary  acts  of   1848   and  1849,   see  "Quellenkunde,"  nos. 6066  to   6073.- For   operations  in   the   Diet  after  1850,   the   collection  of   documents by   Poschinger  (reports  of   Bismarck,  Prussian  envoy).

The  most  important  of   the   letters  and   memoirs  are  Gentz  (in   the   service of   the   Austrian  government,  a  confidant  of   Metternich),  Varnhagen  von Ense,   Liberal.

WORKS.- The  most  detailed  history  is   Treitschke,  "   Deutsche  Gesch. in   XlX'en  Jahrhundert,"  5   vols.,  last  edition,  1886-95,  stopped  by   the death  of   the   author  in   1848   ;   very  partial   and  violent  (Prussian  and  conservative), but  well  informed  and  agreeable  reading.  The  most  reliable outline  is   C.   Bulle,   "   Gesch.  der   Neuesten  Zeit,"   2d   edit.,   1886-87.- The volume  of   the  Oncken  collection,  G.   Flathe,  "Zeitalter  der  Restauration und  der  Revolution  "   (1883),  is   mediocre. - The  "   Allgemeine  Deutsche Biographic,"  which  began  in   1875   and  is   to   be   completed  in   40   vols.,  consists of   signed   articles,  biographies  of   scientific  value. - In   French: Gervinus,  "   Hist,  du   XIX«  Siecle  "   (trans,   from  the   Germ.),  stops   at   1830; now  out  of   print.- Van  Deventer,  i'   Cinquante  Annees  de   1'Hist.  Federate de   rAllemagne,"  1870,   Belgian,  popular  work.

ON  THE  DIET  :   K.   Fischer,  "   Die   Nation  und   der   Bundestag,"  1880,   agood account  of   the   faults  in   the   federal  organization.  G.Meyer,  "   Lehrbiich des   deutschen  Staatsrecht  "   has   a   good   sketch.

ON  MOVEMENTS  AFTER  1830:  J.-R.  Mucke,  "   Die  Politischen  Bewegungen in   Deutschland  von  1830   bis   1835,"   2   vols.,   1875.

*   The   excellence  of   these  collections  has   led   me  to   reduce  the   bibliographical references  for   all   the   German  countries  to   the   fundamental documents  and  the   most  convenient  of   the   general  works.  Further,  I   have felt   able   to   confine  myself   to   a   brief   indication  of   the   author's  name  ; for the   title   in   detail,   it   is   enough   to   refer   to   the   "   Quellenkunde."

ON  THE  REVOLUTION  OF  48   :   Haym,  "   Die  Deutsche  National  versammlung,"  3   vols.,  1848-50.- S.-B.  Taillandier,  "Etude  sur   la   Revol.  en   Allemagne,"  2   vols.,   1853.

ON  THE  REACTION  :   A.   Bernstein,  "   Revolutions-  und  Reaktions-Geschichte,"  etc.,  3   vols.,   1882-84.

ON  THE  MOVEMENT  FOR  UNITY:  F.   Jastrow,  "   Gesch.  des  Deutschen Einheitstraumes  .  .  .,"   4th   edit,   1891.-  Levy-Bruhl,  "   L'Allemagne  depuis Leibnitz,"  1890.

## CHAPTER  XIII.

THE   AUSTRIAN   EMPIRE   UNDER   THE   ABSOLUTIST    SYSTEM.

The  Austrian  Empire  in   1814, - Austria  was  little  affected  by the   French  Revolution.  Its   government  had  struggled  against Napoleon  without  attempting  to  reform  its   internal  organization; it   had  contented  itself  with  becoming  bankrupt,  by   the Declaration  of   1811,   which  reduced  the   value  of   its   paper  money. Its   territory  was  not  thrown  topsy-turvy  like   that   of   the   German states;  Austria  alone,  in   exchange  for   its   outlying  provinces (Briesgau  and  Belgium),  received  adjoining  provinces,  the   archbishopric of   Salzburg,  and   the   domains  of   Venice,  which  included the   whole  Adriatic  coast.

After  the   fall   of   the   German  Empire  the   Emperor  took  the new  title  of   Emperor  of   Austria  (1806);  all   his   states  were  for the   first   time   united  under  a   collective  name.  But   this   empire did   not   form  a   nation;  it   remained  a   conglomeration  of   peoples placed  side  by   side   under  the   same  sovereign.  To   understand the   history   of   Austria  it   is,   therefore,  necessary  to   describe  the various  peoples  which  compose,  it.   These  are  ancient  nations or  remnants  of   nations  which,  before  being   united  under  a   common government,  had   had   nothing   in   common,  and   which  have since  preserved  their  distinctive  tongues  and  administrative forms.  Historically  they   fall  into  four  groups,  omitting  the Italians  in   the   Lombardo-Venetian  Kingdom  (already  noticed  in chap,   xi.):

1.   The   hereditary  countries  of   the   region   of   the   Alps,   grouped about    the     Archduchy    of     Austria    under    various    titles    (n provinces) ;
2.   The   countries  of   the   Crown  of   Bohemia,  composed  of   three ancient  provinces:  Bohemia,  Moravia,  and  Silesia  (the   small  bit of   Silesia  around  Troppau  which  still   remains  to   Austria) ;
3.   The   Polish  Kingdom  of   Galicia,  with  its   annex,  Bukovina, a   Roumanian  country  taken  from  Moldavia;
4.   The   countries  of   the   Crown  of   St.   Stephen,   comprising  four states:  the   Kingdom  of   Hungary,  the  principality  of   Transyl-

401  26

## 402     AUSTRIAN  EMPIRE    UNDER  ABSOLUTIST  SYSTEM.

vania,  the   Croatian  Kingdom  of   Croatia  and  Sclavonia,  and the   province  of   Servia.  (The   Kingdom  of   Dalmatia,  formerly a   possession  of   Venice,  makes  a   part   of   the   same  region   and   the same  people   as   the   Croatian  group,   but   by   government  it   belongs to   the   countries  of   the   Vienna  group.)

These  groups  are  themselves  only   historical  formations,  conglomerations of   disunited  nations.  This  is   the   cause  of   the   complex nature  of   Austrian  politics.

The  countries  of   group  I  were  essentially  German.  In Vienna,  the   Archduchy  of   Austria,  and  the   northern  provinces the   German  language  prevails.  But  a   Slavic  population  occupied the   south,   Carniola,  a   bit   of   Styria   and   Carinthia,  Goertz, Gradisca,  and  Istria;  in   the   two   latter  provinces  and   in   Trieste, however,  Italian  was  the   language  of   the   cities.

The  Bohemian  group  was  mainly  Slavic  (Czechs),  but  there was  a   large   number  of   German  colonists,  especially  in   the   cities, and   the   northwest  part   of   Bohemia  which  touches  Germany  had been  almost  entirely  Germanized.

The  Galician  group  was  Slavic,  but  of   two  different  races. Polish  Catholics  occupied  the   whole  west,  while  in   the   east,   formerly taken   from   the   Russians,  they   formed  only   the   aristocracy. The  majority  in   the   east  were  Ruthenians;  these  had  formerly been  orthodox,  but   now  belonged  to   the   United  Greek  Church, and   were  affiliated  with   Catholicism,  while  preserving  their  Slavic ceremony  and  their  married  priests.  Bukovina  had  a   Roumanian population.

The  group  of   the   Crown  of   St.   Stephen  was  the   most  heterogeneous of   all.  The  chief  state,  the   Kingdom  of   Hungary,  was Magyar,  but  with  many   German  colonies,  scattered  over  the plains,   especially  in   the   west;  and   an  almost  solid   Slavic  population, the   Slovacks,   in   the   northwest,  adjoining  Moravia.  Transylvania was   composed   of   orthodox  Roumanian  peasants,  under two  ruling   peoples:  the   Magyars  from  Hungary  and  Protestant German  colonists  (Saxons),  who  had   been  established  in   the   central part   of   the   country   for   several  centuries. - Croatia,  Sclavonia, and   Dalmatia  had   a   population  of   Slavic  (Croat)   Catholics. The   Italians,   however,  predominated  at   that   time  in   the coast  cities,   and   in   the   east   Servian  refugees  who   had   remained orthodox. lics.

There  was  not  at   that   time   the   rivalry   in   language  and   religion that   now  prevails ; but   the   differences  were  enough  to   prevent  any feeling   of   unity   among  the   inhabitants  of   the   Empire   and   even

among  neighbouring  peoples  in   the   same  region.  The  government had   given   up   trying   to   unite   them   under  a   common  administration. Metternich  rejected   the   "   plan   of   simple  fusion  " which  Joseph  II.   had   tried.  The   Crown  of   St.   Stephen  had   preserved its   own  government  distinct  from  the   monarchy;  dualism was  the   fundamental  law  of   the   Empire.  The   other  groups,  the hereditary  states,  Bohemia  and  Galicia,  were  directly  subject  to the   government  at   Vienna,  but   retained  remnants  of   a  separate administration.

The  Slavs  formed  the   majority  of   the   population  of   the   Empire, but   a   submissive  and   unorganized  majority.  They   were cut   into   two   branches,  north  and  south,  separated  by   the   Germans and   Magyars  in   the   valley   of   the   Danube,  and   divided  into six   national  groups:  (i)   Czechs  and  Slovacks,  (2)   Poles,  (3) Ruthenians,  in   the   north ; (4)   Slovenians,  (5)   Croats,  (6)   Servians, in   the   south.  They   were  ruled  by   an  aristocracy  and   a   government representing  a   minority  of   more  advanced  civilization  or superior  organization,  the   Germans  in   the   west  and   the   Magyars in   the   east.

The  Germans  were  the   preponderant  force.  Vienna, the   capital, was  a   German  city;   the   imperial  family   and   court  were  German; German  was  the   language  of   the   government  and   the   army.   This system  was  the   outcome  of   family   policy,   at   a   time  when  there was  almost  no  thought  of   nationalities;  the   birth  of   patriotism would  make  it   impracticable.

Metternich's  System. - The  internal  government  remained  the same  as   before  the   Revolution.  The  Emperor  exercised  his absolute  authority,  with  the   aid   of   ministers  and   councils.  His chief  minister  was  Metternich,  a  member  of   a  noble  family   of western  Germany,  first  of   all   a   diplomatist;  he   had   charge   of   foreign affairs,   but   by   his   personal   influence  he   directed  internal policy   also.

Francis  II.,   in   spite   of   the   familiar  aspect   given   by   his   simple manners  and  his   Vienna  dialect,  was  thoroughly  imbued  with the   spirit   of   absolutism,  very   firm   against   any   sort  of   opposition; as   described  by   his   uncle  Joseph   II. , he   was  conservative  because of   his   "   indifference,  indecision,  and  fear  of   being   bored."  He abhorred  the  idea  of   reform,  comparing  his   empire  to  an  old house  which  would  crumble  away   if   he   should  try   to   repair   it. Metternich,  a   man  of   society,   a   brilliant  conversationalist,  sceptical, well   read,   smiling,   -and   affable,   had   erected  his   conservative feelings   into   a   theory;   he   talked  continually  of   fighting   the   Revo-

lution,  which  meant  practically  to   prevent  any  change  and   avoid any   form  of   popular  control.  He  fought  the  Revolution  in Europe  by   maintaining  absolute  governments;  he   fought  it   in Austria  by   preserving  the   old   regime.

The  central  government  at   Vienna  was  a  medley  of   ministers and  governing  boards,  or  collective  ministries,  some  of   them having  jurisdiction  over  the   whole  empire,  some  over  a   group  of provinces.  The  former  chief  council,  the  Haus-Hof-Staatskanzlei,  managed  foreign  affairs,  police,  and  finance;  but   there were  special   chancelleries  for   Bohemia  and   Galicia,  Austria  and Illyria,   and   the   Lombardo- Venetian  Kingdom;  the   special  councils (Hofstelle)  of   Hungary,  Transylvania,  the   Aulic  Council  of War,   the   Aulic  Chamber,  and   the   general   board  of   audit  were  preserved. In   order  to  make  this  machinery  work  together,  the Emperor,  in   1814,   had   ordered  "   conferences  "   between  the   heads of   departments  and   certain  confidential  councillors.  It   was  not until   later,   under  his   successor,  that   the   Conference,  a   sort  of   ministerial council,   was  organized.  The   Council  of   State,   which  was reorganized  in   1814,   was  reduced  to   a   consultative  function.

These  bodies,  all   interfering  with   one  another,  and   unable  to decide  a  question  without  endless  writing  and  formality,  conducted affairs   with   proverbial  slowness,  leaving   to   the   Emperor the   responsibility  of   deciding  the   smallest  details.  And  all   these official  managers  managed  nothing  at  all.  The  government, having  neither  accounts  to   render  nor  public   opinion  to   contend with,   worked  secretly  and   arbitrarily.  No   one  could  get   a   clear view  of   the   public   finances.  After  1814   there  was  always   a   deficit, but   this   deficit   was  not   acknowledged;  it   was  always   covered with   remnants  of   loans  made  to   defray   special   expenses.

This  administration  of   scribbling  formalists  shrunk  from  coming to   any   decision.  Each  referred  a   measure  to   another,  without daring  to  settle  anything.  When  Stadion,  governor  of   Dalmatia,   required  regulations  for   the   communes  of   his   province,  he had   to   enact  them  on   his   own  responsibility;  this   gained   him   the reputation  of   a   hot-headed  man.

Officially,  society  remained  aristocratic.  Nobles  were  exempt from   military   service  and   common  courts;  they   alone  had the   right   to   acquire   noble  lands  and   fill   high   offices.  On   their own  estates  they   retained  the   seigniorial  powers  of   police,   justice, and  the   regulation  of   industry.  Peasants  were  subject  to  seigniorial justice,   seigniorial   dues,   and   corvee  on   the   lands  of   the seigneur.  Provincial  administration  remained  divided  between

government  officials  and  the  provincial  estates,  which  were charged  with  the   apportionment  of   the   taxes  and  the   levies  of recruits.  Estates  were  even  re-established  in   those  provinces where  they   had  fallen  into  disuse.  But  the   old   estates  did   not represent  the   people   and   had   no  power.  Except  in   the   Tyrol, they   were  composed  almost  entirely  of   nobles,  a   few   cities  being represented  (4   in   Bohemia,  i   in   Galicia).  The  estates,  furthermore, were  convoked  only   to   hear   and   approve  the   official  proposals relating   to   taxes.  The   decree  which  re-established  the estates  in   Galicia  in   1817   recommended  "   the   avoidance  of   anything that   might   produce   the   illusion  that   the   taxes  depended  on their  consent."  The  session  was  reduced  to   a   solemn  and   silent meeting,  followed  by   a   banquet;  often  it   lasted  only   one   day.

An  example  is   given,   however,  of   a  concession  made  to   the provincial  estates:  the   Estates  of   Bohemia,  in   1825,   prevailed on   the   government,  which  was  asking   a   reform  in   land  taxation, to   maintain  the   inequality  in   favour  of   the   nobles ; this   was   done, it   is   said,   to   compensate  Prince  Windischgraetz  for   the   insult given   him   at   the   Congress  of   Verona  by   the   Russian  Grand  Duke Constantine.

As   the   great   aim   of   this   government  was  to   prevent  any   form of   agitation,  the   government  took  measures  to   deprive  the   people of   any   temptation  to   concern  themselves  with  public   affairs,  to talk   or  even  think  of   them.  This  was  the   task  assigned  to   the censorship  and   the   secret  police.  Censorship,  a   branch  of   police, was  applied  not  only   to   the   theatres,  but   to   newspapers  and books;  being   independent  of   any   restrictions,  the   censor  was  omnipotent. No   political   work  was  published  in   Austria.  The introduction  of   foreign   books  of   a   liberal  nature,  such   as   Hallam, Augustin  Thierry,  Sismondi,  and  even  Broussais'  medical  books was   forbidden.  The  police   gave  personal  attention  to   foreigners, professors,  students,  and  even  office-holders;  they   had  spies   in the   lecture  rooms,  and   had   librarians  report  the   books  borrowed by   each  professor.  Every   form  of   association  was  strictly  forbidden. A   number  of   young  men  from  Switzerland,  most  of whom  were  teachers,  had   in   1817   founded  an   historico-pedagogic society  which  they   had  soon  dissolved:  in   1819   they   were  arrested, held   in   prison   ten   months  and   sent  out  of   the   country; the   police   report  said   that   their  statutes  resembled  those  of   the Free  Masons.  In   1825   the   police   arrested  the   members  of   a comic  society,  writers,  artists,  and   musicians,  who  were  amusing themselves  with  drafting  passports  with  grotesque  names.  Aus-

## 4°6      AUSTRIAN  EMPIRE    UNDER  ABSOLUTIST  SYSTEM.

trian  subjects  could  not   leave  the   Empire  without  a   passport  and the   government  would  grant  only   a   few   of   them.

The  Catholic  Church  was  still  the   state  church.  The  clergy remained  strictly  dependent  on  the   government;  Metternich  and the   Emperor  held  to   Josephism - that   is,   the   supremacy  of   the   lay sovereign.  But  religion  remained  compulsory  for   subjects;  students were  compelled  to   go   to   mass  and   confession;  many   bought confessional  letters  from  comrades;  these  letters  had   among  students a   variable  price   like   stocks  or   bonds.  The  schools  were under  clerical  inspection.  Non-Catholics  were  tolerated  (since Joseph  II.),   but   legally   excluded  from  public   office;   they   had   to pay   tor  the   privilege  of   acquiring  landed  property,  the   right   of citizenship,  membership  in   a   trade  guild,   or  a   university  degree. This  set  of   measures  was  called  the   Metternich  system,  but   the name  is   but   a   poor   definition  for   a   system  of   paternal   oppression, slow  and   very  negligent,  like   the   Viennese  officials  charged  with enforcing  it;   it   was  a   tendency  rather  than   a   system.

The  government  forbade  its   subjects  any   thought  of   public interests,  but   allowed  them  to   amuse  themselves  freely.  Vienna acquired  the   reputation  of   a   capital   given   over  to   amusements.

National  Opposition  in   Hungary. - There  still   remained  in   the constitution  of   the  Kingdom  of   Hungary  a  remnant  of   the dualism  recognised  by   Maria  Theresa.  The  Emperor  was  still King   of   Hungary  and   obliged  to   preserve  the   constitution.  Joseph II.   had  brought  on  an   insurrection  by   trying   to   reform  it, but  it   had   been  re-established  in   1791;   Francis  had  publicly praised  it.   In   1820,   when  he   came  to   Pesth  to   take  part   in   a military  review,  he   gave  a   discourse  in   Latin,  the   official  language of   the   Hungarian  government.  "   Totus  mundus  stidtisat et   relictis  antiquis  snis  legibus,   constitutions  imaginarias  quarit. Vos  constitutionem  a  majoribus  accept   am   illasam  habetis;  amatis illam   ct   ego   illam   amo  et   conservabo  et   ad   heredes  transmittam."

But   while  protesting  his   affection  for   this   traditional  constitution, the   Emperor   had   no   thought   of   applying  it.   The   constitution of   Hungary,  which  since  the   Middle  Ages   had  been  imposed on   the   Kings   by   the   Magyar   aristocracy,  established  a central  assembly,  the   Diet,   to   govern  the   kingdom  in   harmony with  the   King   and  55   local  assemblies,  one  in   each  county (comitat).  This  system  resembled  England's  Parliament  and county  assemblies. posed

The  Diet  was  to   meet  at   least  once  in   three  years;   but   since 1812   the   government  had   not  convoked  it.   In   the   absence  of   the

Diet  the   county  assemblies  resisted  absolutism  in   the   name  of   the constitution.  In   1815,   when  the   government  had   made  a   direct appeal   to   them,   ordering  them  to   raise  subsidies  and   recruits,  the county  assemblies  decreed  that  they   were  unable  to   act  without being   so  ordered  by   the   Diet,   and   forbade  officials  to   obey   the call;   the   Emperor  quashed  these  decrees  as  an  offence  against his   royal   powers.  This  time  the   counties  yielded.  But   after  1820, when  the   government  ordered  a   levy   of   recruits  or  payment  of taxes  in   coin  (instead  of   paper),   the   county  assemblies  refused again   and   demanded  a   meeting  of   the   Diet.  The   government  sent administrators  and  commissioners  to  assess  the  land  tax  and levy   the   soldiers.  The   officials  of   the   county  made  only   a   passive resistance:  they   ceased  to   exercise  their  functions;  but   the   royal commissioners,  being   unable  to   discover  either  the   records,  the seals,   or   the   keys   of   the   archives,  could  not   levy   the   taxes  for want  of   information.  The  Emperor  finally   yielded;  under  pretext of   wanting  to   have  his   wife  crowned  in   Hungary,  he   convoked the   Diet   at   Presburg   in   1825.

After  1830   a  political  agitation  was  set  on   foot   in   Hungary, and  reform  parties   began   to   show  themselves  in   the   Diet  and   in the   county  assemblies.  The  movement  was  at  once  liberal  and national.  The  Diet  which  met  in   1832   demanded  a  more  completely Hungarian  government:  more  frequent  visits  by   the   Emperor to   Hungary,  the   holding  of   the   Diet,   not  at   Presburg,  a   German city   on   the   border,   but   at   Pesth,   the   Magyar   capital,   in   the heart  of   the   country, - also   the   use  of   Magyar   as   the   official  language in   place   of   Latin.  On   national  policy   all   the   Magyars were  agreed;  on   liberal  reforms  they   were  divided.  A   liberal party  was  organized,  which  proposed  to   reform  the   constitution and  society,  as  well  as  a  conservative  party  which  wished  to maintain  the  old  regime  with  an  exclusively  Magyar  government. man

Society  in   Hungary  was  still   organized  as   in   the   Middle  Ages, divided  into  two  classes  unequal  before  the   law:  the   nobles,  the only   full   citizens,  exempt  from  taxation  of   any   kind,   owing   no military  service  but   in   the   general   call   to   arms  (insurrectw)  ;   the peasants,  tenants  of   the   nobility,   burdened  with   rents  and   corvees, paying  all   the   taxes,   furnishing  all   the   recruits  for   the   army,  and possessing  no  political  rights   whatever.  The  nobles  alone  constituted the   political   nation;  there  were,   however,  a   great   many  of them;  many   lived  in   the   country,  as  poor  and   uneducated  as   the peasantry.

408      AUSTRIAN  EMPIRE    UNDER  ABSOLUTIST  SYSTEM.

The  administration  of   the   county   belonged  to   the   nobles.  At certain  intervals,  all   the   nobles  of   the   county  met   in   congregate to   make  reparatio,  that   is,   to   elect   officers,   judges,   administrators, and  financial  employees;  the   elections  were  tumultuous,  with banquets,  sprees,   fights   between  partisans  of   the   various  candidates, vote   by   acclamation,  and   the   successful  candidate  borne  off in   triumph.  A   lively   description  of   an  election  is   given   by one of   the   liberal  chiefs,   Eotvos,  in   "   Der   Dorfnotar  "   (the   village notary),  a   romance  of   customs  (translated  into   German).

The  Diet  of   the   kingdom  was  composed  of   two  Tables:  the Table  of   Magnates,  formed  of   great   nobles  holding  their   seats   by virtue  of   hereditary  right ; the   Table  of   Estates,   formed  of   elective deputies,  1 10  nobles  (2   for   each   county)   and   2   representatives  in all   for   all   the   cities ;   also   delegates  from  the   Diet   of   the   Kingdom of   Croatia.

This  mechanism  was  similar  to   that   of   the   English  Lords  and Commons.  But  its   working  was  disorderly.  Jumbled  together in   the   same   hall   sat   the   deputies   from   the   counties  and   the   cities, delegates  from  the  Croatian  Diet,  prothonotaries,  representatives from   the   chapters   and   convents,  proxies   for   absent  Magnates, not   to   mention  spectators  and   even   ladies;   some  had   no vote;  the   two   deputies   of   a   county   had   but   one  vote   between  them. There  was  no  regular  voting;  instead  the   old   Middle- Age   maxim was  applied:  Vota  non  numerantur  sed   ponder   antur.  There  was not  even  an  actual  vote  taken,   for   the   deputies,  being   obliged   to await  instructions  from  their  constituents,  could  give   only   provisional answers.

The  Diet  was  not  a   real   parliament,  and   found  no  really   centralized ministry   to   co-operate  with.  Government  policy   was decided,  on  the   one   hand,   at   Vienna  under  the   influence  of   the court;  on   the   other,   in   the   comitat  assemblies,  which  were  ruled  by the   opinions  of   the   country  nobles.  The   liberal  party   desired  at once  to   reform  society   by   abolishing  the   corvee,  rents,  and   inequality of   taxation,  and   to   establish  a   true  representative  system by   extending  the   voting  qualification  to  employees,  teachers, lawyers,  notaries,  physicians,  clergymen,  merchants,  and  manufacturers, and   by   giving   each   deputy   an   individual  vote.

The  Reform  Diet  lasted  40   months  (1832-36)  and  held  470 meetings.  The   liberals  presented  their  grievances  and   demanded liberty   of   the   press,   but   the   Magnates,  by   agreement  with   the   government, defeated   almost   all   the   reform  projects.   They   did,   however, adopt   a   measure  that   was  regarded  as  an   important  prece-

dent:  the   suspension  bridge   over  the   Danube  at   Pesth  was  to be   a   toll   bridge,   and   nobles  were  to   pay   for   crossing   as  well   as commons;  this  was  the  first  action  taken  against  the  nobles' privilege  of   exemption  from  taxes.

Meanwhile,  in   Transylvania,  the  Magyars  were  working  to effect  a   union  between  Transylvania  and   Hungary.  The   Estates of   Transylvania,  convoked  in   1834   for   the   first   time  since  1809, struggled  against  the   government,  refused  to   recognise  members of   the   gubernium  as  not  elected,  constituted  themselves  without them,  declared  themselves  responsible  to   their  electors,  and   had their  journals  printed   in   spite   of   the   prohibition  against   publishing them.  The  government  had  them  dissolved  and  set  up   a military  government.

Political  life   now  awoke  in   Hungary.  Kossuth,  a   young   lawyer, secretary  to   a   deputy,   established  the   first   Magyar   politicalpaper.  He  was  arrested,  held  two  years   in   prison,  then  condemned, but   pardoned   later.  His   reputation  was  made;   he   became one  of   the   leaders  of   the   opposition.  He   demanded  a   Diet for   three  years,   to   sit   annually  at   Pesth,   and   the   abolition  of   seigniorial rights.   There   was  a   Diet   in   1839,   and   a   Diet   from   1842 to   1844;   the   Magnates  again   rejected  the   reforms,  and   the   counties instructed  their   deputies   to   maintain  the   nobles'  exemption from  taxes.

The  government  had  at   least  yielded   on   the   language  question; Magyar  was  declared  the   language  for   laws  in   1836,   for   the   administration in   1840,   for   the   government  and   education  in   1844. Kossuth,  possessing  a  strong  and  sonorous  voice,  with  lively gestures,  had  become  very  popular  as  an  orator;  he   formed  a democratic  and  provincial  party  which  proposed  to   abolish  privileges and   create  a   Magyar   government  without  diminishing  the power  of   the   county  assemblies.  The  centralizing  liberals  considered it   necessary  to   diminish  the   influence  of   the   counties, which  supported  the  system  of   privileges,  and  to   increase  the power  of   the   Diet.  Their  program  in   1847,   drafted  by   Deak, demanded  reform  of   taxation  and  control  of   taxes  by   the   Diet. "   We   think  it   unjust   that   Hungary's  interests  should  be   subordinated to   those  of   the   hereditary  states,  and   we  will   no   longer   consent to   the   sacrifice  of   our  rights   to   administrative  unity,   which too  readily   passes   for   unity   of   the   monarchy." National  Opposition  by   the  Slavs. - In   the   Slavic  countries, which  were  less  strongly  organized  than  the  Hungarian,  the national  opposition  was  weaker  and  more  scattered.  It   was   de-

## 4*0      AUSTRIAN  EMPIRE    UNDER  ABSOLUTIST  SYSTEM,

veloped   independently   by    three   peoples:   Poles,    Czechs,   and Croats.

1.   The   Polish  movement  had   its   centre  outside  of   the   Empire, at   Cracow,  which  was  organized  as  an  aristocratic  republic  since 1815;   there  the   plots   to   re-establish  ancient  Poland  were  drawn up.      In   1831    the   Austrian  government  sent  an  army  of   occupation into   Cracow,  then   evacuated  it.      These  conspiracies  were, however,  directed  less  against  the   Austrian  province  of   Galicia than  against  the   Prussian  and   Russian  possessions  in   Poland.

This  Czech  movement,  unlike  the  other  national  movements hi   Austria,  extended  its   influence  beyond   a   mere  local  agitation. The  Czech  patriots  interested  themselves  principally  in   questions of   langauge;  they   were  impressed  with  the   multitude  of   people speaking  the   Slavic  tongue,  and   began   to   consider  the   Slavs  a superior  race,  the   most  numerous  and   most  gifted,   which  would rule   the   world  if   it   united  and   trusted  in   its   force.  They   wished to   see   it   united  in   a   single   body;   the   Czechs,   being   the   most  civilized, directed  the   movement  of   uniting   all   the   Slavs  into   one family.  This  was  the   origin   of   Panslavism.  It   was  a   vague   idea; the   Czechs,  while  trying   to   formulate  it,   expected  to   be   supported by   the   only   independent  Slavic  nation,   the   Russian  Empire.  The literary   opposition  devoted  its   energies  against   the   German  race and  the   Austrian  government.  Its   hostility  was  shown  most distinctly  in   protestations  against  German  officials  in   Bohemia and   against   the   use  of   German  in   administration  and   in   schools; for   lack   of   means  of   action,   it   accomplished  no  practical   reform.

2.   The   Czech  movement  was  set  on   foot  at   Prague  and   was chiefly    literary.      Since  the    downfall   of    the    Czech   nation   in 1620,   German  had   become  the   language,  not  only   of   the   government, but   of   the   university,  and   of   all   educated  society,   the   only language  of   literature  and   science ; Czech  was  regarded  as  a   patois fit   only   for   the   peasantry  and   the   illiterate.     In   1819   a   number of   Czech  patriots  found  in   a   convent  at   Koniginhof  a   manuscript containing  Czech   national   anthems   of   the   thirteenth   century (now   regarded  as  a   forgery).     A   small  group  of   learned  and scholarly  men  began  then  to  work  for   the   revival  of   national pride,   by   reminding  the   Czechs  of   the   literature  they   had   possessed and   the   great   nation  they   had   once   been;   they   established Czech  reviews  and   clubs;  the   patriotic  historian  Palacky  wrote  a history   of   Bohemia.

3   Among  the   southern  Slavs  the   opposition  was   in   the   hands of   the   only   Slavic  people   that   had   preserved  a   remnant  of   a

national  organization,  the   Croats ; its   centre  was  at   Agram,   and   it was  at   once  both  literary   and   political.  Patriots  began   to   study Croatian  antiquities  and   laboured  to   build  up   a   Croatian  literature. Gaj   founded  the   Illyrian  National  Gazette  in   1836.   The  Croats, like   the   Czechs,  desired  to   lead   their   brother  Slavs;   they   dreamed of   a   union  of   southern  Slavs  speaking  the   Croatian  tongue,  and an   Illyrian  kingdom  comprising  Croatia,  Sclavonia,  and  Dalmatia.  Croatia  already  had  its   national  administration,  its   governor, the   Ban   of   Croatia,   its   provincial  Estates.  But   it   was at   the   same  time   subject   to   two  governments,  that   of   Hungary  and that   of   the   Empire.  The   Croatian  national  party   thus   confronted both  the   Austrian  government  and  the   Magyar  national  movement. The   Hungarian  Diet,   in   1843,   adopted   Magyar  in   place of   Latin;   the   Croatian  deputies  wished  to   speak   Latin  still,   but whenever  a   Croatian  began  a  speech  with  the   hitherto  accustomed formula,   Exccllcntissime  domine,   a   general   uproar   drowned his   voice.  The  Magyars  carried  the   day;   the   Austrian  government formally   recognised  Magyar  as   the   only   language  in   the Diet,   and   ordered  the   Illyrian   Gazette  to   change   its   name  to   CroatSlavonic-Dalmatian  Gazette.  The  Croats  retorted  (1845)   by   declaring Croat   the   only   language  of   the   provincial  estates  at Agram,  and  withdrawing  from  the  Turopoles,  rustic  Magyar nobles  established  in   Croatia,  the   right   of   taking   part   in   the Estates.

Liberal  German  Opposition. - In   the   German  provinces,  where the   government  was  German,  the  opposition  was  not  national, but   simply   liberal.  The  nobles,  citizens,  and   students  wanted  a constitutional  system  with  freedom  of   the   press.   They   had   taken their  ideas  from  foreign  newspapers  and  political  books,  especially those   of   France  and   southern  Germany.  Such  publications were  prohibited  and   should  have  been  stopped  at   the   frontier. But   the   censorship  was  relaxed.  Francis  II.,   who   died   in 1835,   had   been  succeeded  by   his   son   Ferdinand,  a   weak-minded man,  and  incapable  of   managing  his   government.  Metternich, as   he   grew  older,   was   becoming  more  and  more  obstinate  and indolent.  The  absolutist  machine  still  existed,  but   it   did   not work  well,   for   lack   of   a   head;   the   prohibitions  were  maintained, but   the   government  agents   had   become  more  tolerant  and  permitted things   that   they   were  charged   to   forbid.  The   director  of police   in   Prague,   who   had   received  orders  to   forbid  balls  during Advent,  turned  his   back  to   the   dancers  that  he   might   not  see them.  The  police  permitted  the  printing  and  circulation  of tions tier.

## 412      AUSTRIAN  EMPIRE    UNDER  ABSOLUTIST  SYSTEM.

pamphlets  unfavourable  to   the   government  and   the   selling   of   forbidden books.  Publishers  issued  forbidden  papers  as  covers  to prayer-books  or  cook-books.

In   like   manner,  in   the   commercial  world,   customs  duties  that were  almost  prohibitory  were  retained;  but   the   officials  permitted foreign  wares  to   be   smuggled  in.   Until  1844   the   duties  collected were  ridiculous;  according  to   official  statistics,  only   one  silk   garment had   entered  the   country  within  three  years.

Education  still   excluded  all   modern  subjects;  in   the   ecclesiastical colleges   only   a   smattering  of   Latin   was  taught;   in   the   universities practically   nothing   but   law.  But   many   Austrians secured  themselves  modern  instruction  in   private - incoherent, incomplete,  and   superficial  instruction  whose  influence  may  still be   seen   in   the   present  generation.  Austrian  opposition,  sprung from  contact  with  foreign  ideas,   was  an   imitation  of   the   liberal oppositions  in   France  and   Germany.

The  Revolution  of   1848. - The  government  was  opposed  by two  parties:  the   liberals,  who   reproached  it   with  being   arbitrary; and   the   nationalists,  who   chafed  under  a   foreign   language  and administration.  The  malcontents  took  advantage  of   the   general movement  in   1848   to   organize  a   liberal  and   national  revolution like   that   in   Germany ; but   while  in   Germany  the   national  revolution consisted  in   the   union  of   small  states  into   one  great   nation, in   Austria  it   tended  toward  the   separation  of   a   great   state  into small  nations.

A   first   isolated  revolt  was  made  in   Galicia  as  early   as  1846. The   Polish  nobles  tried  to   re-establish  the   independence  of   Poland. The   government  did   not  even  take  the   trouble  to   fight them;  they   simply  turned  upon  them  their  own  peasants,  the Ruthenians;  the   peasants  arrested  the   Polish  conspirators  and gave  them  over  to   the   Austrian  authorities.  The  government then   seized  the   opportunity  to   occupy  the   Republic  of   Cracow and   annex  it   to   Galicia,   with   the   consent  of   Prussia  and   Russia (1847).  This  was  the  last  Polish  state  to   lose  its   independence.

The   general  movement  began   in   March,  1848,   in   both  of   the ruling   nations  at   the   same  time,   Germany  and  Hungary,  and almost  simultaneously  in   the   Slavic  countries.

In   Austria  the   news  of   the   revolution  in   France  was  enough   to break   up   the   government.  Archduchess  Sophia   became  alarmed and   demanded  the   dismissal  of   Metternich,  who  was  very  unpopular; the   archdukes  and  ministers  signified  their  approval.

The  Viennese  liberals  began  to   show  their  dissatisfaction.  In the   absence  of   any   sort  of   political   body   to   transmit  their   wishes to   the   government,  groups  of   every  nature  took  the   initiative: publishers,  the   Industrial  Society,  the   Juridico-political  Reading Club,  and   students.  Petitions  were  presented  calling   for   liberty in   education,  religion,  speech,  and   press,  publicity  of   the   budget, and  periodic  representation.  Censorship  and  police  ceased  to perform  tlieir   office.  The   ministerial  conference  became  alarmed and  declared  itself  ready   to   convoke  a   delegation  of   the   Estates of   the   different  provinces  to   make  terms  with  a  government committee.

The  revolution  came  suddenly  with  a  single   riot;   the   demoralized government  made  no  effort  to   defend  itself.  The   Estates  of Lower  Austria  had   just   met.  On   March  14   the   students  met   in the   courtyard  before  the   hall  where  the   Estates  sat;   a  young Jewish  doctor  mounted  upon  the  roof  of   the  well  and  cried: "Long  live  liberty!"  The  members  of   the  Estates  tried  to parley   through  the   window,  then  sent  a   delegation  of   12  members. A   report  was  circulated  that  the   soldiers  were  coming; the   mob  invaded  the   hall.  The  Estates  went  to  the   imperial palace  to   present  the   demands;  while  they   were  gone  the   soldiers opened   fire.   The   mob  cried :   "   Down  with  Metternich  ! Down  with  the   soldiers !  "   Metternich  made  light   of   this   incident; it   was,   he   said,   a   stroke  concerted  by   certain  Jews,   Poles, and   Frenchmen.  But   the   other  members  of   the   Conference  were alarmed,  and,   wishing  to   calm  the   crowd,   finally   obliged   Metternich to   resign.

The  revolution  was  the  work  of   students  and  citizens  of Vienna;  it   was  they   who  assumed  power.  They   armed  themselves and   formed  the   Academic  Legion   and   the   national  guard, which  in   the   month  of   May   organized  the   "   Central  Committee for   the   Defence  of   Popular  Rights."  This  committee  governed Vienna.  The  Imperial  government  dared  refuse  it   nothing;  it declared  the   pre'ss   free   from  restriction,  convoked  the   deputies (March  15),   and   promulgated  a  constitution  built  on   the   Belgian model  (April   25).   It   then   tried   to   dissolve  the   central  committee. But  the   populace  forced  it   to   convoke  an  assembly  elected  by universal  suffrage  to   draft  a   constitution  (May   15).   Then  the Emperor  fled  to   the   Tyrol   with  his   family.  The   ministers  were at   Vienna  without  troops  (the   soldiers  had   been  sent  to   Italy); they   wished  to   dissolve  the   Academic  Legion;  but   the   students and   workingmen  built  barricades,  and   a   "   committee  of   citizens  "

## 414     AUSTRIAN  EMPIRE    UNDER  ABSOLUTIST  SYSTEM.

was  established  to  maintain  order  and  popular  rights.  The ministers  became  alarmed  and  consented  to  retain  the   Legion and  to   intrust  the   police   of   the   city   to   the   committee.  This   now became  the  "   Committee  of   Security."  Then  Archduke  John, who  had  been  sent  to   Vienna  to   fill   the   Emperor's  place,   formed a   new  ministry,  with   a   majority  of   liberals.

The  Assembly,  elected  by   universal  suffrage  and   comprising deputies  from  all   parts   of   the   Empire  except   Hungary,  met  at Vienna  July   22.  There  were  92   peasant  deputies.  They   spoke in   several  tongues,  and  measures  had  to   be   translated  before  a vote  was  taken.  The  Germans  composed  the   left,   the   Czechs  the right.  A   son  of   a  peasant  proposed  to   declare  all   seigniorial rights   abolished.  After  a  month  of   discussion  (73   amendments, 159   questions),  the   Assembly  unanimously  voted  to   abolish  the seigniorial  corvee,  rents,  and   courts,  and   suppressed  all   distinction between  nobles  and   commons.  This  was  the   principal  result of   the   revolution  of   1848.

The  Revolution  in   Hungary. - In   Hungary,  on   March  3,   the Diet,   acting   under  the   influence  of   a   speech   by   Kossuth,  had   sent an  address  to   the   Emperor  asking   for   a   constitution.  Soon  clubs and   a   committee  of   safety   were  constituted,  which  the   Diet  could not  resist.  It   then  began   to   vote  the   reforms  demanded  by   the liberal  party;   freedom  of   the   press,  equal   taxes  and   abolition  of seigniorial  rights.  The  government  of   Vienna,  unable  to  contest the   matter,  granted   the   Magyars  all   that   they   asked:  first   a Hungarian  ministry  which  was  composed  of   the   leaders  of   the three  parties,  conservative,  liberal,  and  democratic  (March  22); then  the   removal  of   the   Diet  from  Presburg  to   Pesth,  annual sessions  of   the   Diet,   and   the   abolition  of   the   censorship.  Next it   granted   the   Hungarian  Palatine  permission  to   exercise  all   the powers  of   a   King.  The  Hungarian  ministry  moved  to   Pesth on   June   26;   the   constituent  assembly  for   Hungary,  elected  in   accordance with   a   new  electoral  law,   met   on   July   2 ;   and  henceforth the   Hungarian  government  was  conducted  as  a  sovereign  state independent  of   the   rest  of   the   Empire.  It   forbade  its   officials  to receive  orders  from  Vienna,  established  a   Hungarian  army  with the   national  colours  of   Hungary,  a  paper  currency,  and   a   Hungarian loan;   it   sent  out   Hungarian  ambassadors  and  announced that   it   would  not  aid   Austria  in   a   war  against   German  unity (August  3).

The  Revolution  in   the   Slav  Countries. - In   the   Slav  countries four   independent  national  movements  were  developed.

In   Galicia,  a   slight   Polish  insurrection  at   Cracow  (April   26) was  checked  by   a   cannonade  of   the   city.

In   Bohemia,  the   Czech  patriots  of   Prague  began   with  an  address to   the   Emperor,   demanding  equality  between  Czechs  and Germans,  and   the   fusion  of   the   provincial  assemblies  of   the   three ancient  provinces  (Bohemia,  Moravia,  and  Silesia).  They   secured the   convocation  of   constituent  provincial  Estates  (April 8),   and   appointed  a   national  committee  to   prepare  for   the   elections to   these   Estates.  The  agitation  increased;  the   Czech national  guards  left   the   Germans  to   form  a   Slav   militia;  people began   to   wear  the   national  dress  and   to   fight   the   Germans  in   the streets.  Then,  under  the   pretext  that   the   minister  at   Vienna  was controlled  by   revolutionists,  the   Bohemian  governor  decided  to form  a  provisional  government  with  the  leaders  of   the   Czech party   (May   30).   To   begin   a   realization  of   'the   idea   of   panslavism, the   Czechs  convoked  a  general  congress  of   Slavs  at   Prague. Palacky  opened  it   on   June   2;   340   members,  of   whom  237   were Czechs,  took  part   in   it.   Speeches  in   praise   of   the   Slav   race  were made  in   various  languages,  in   Russian  by   Bakounine,  in   Polish by   Liebelt,  and   in   Servian  by   Zach;   they   were   hardly   understood. The  congress  was  preparing  a   manifesto  to   the   peoples   of   Europe when  it   was   broken  up   by   the   government.

Among  the  southern  Slavs  the  national  movement  was  directed against   the   Magyars.  The   Croats  first   asked  the   Emperor to   appoint  Jellachich,  a   Croatian  colonel,  as   Ban   (governor)  of Croatia,  and  obtained  his   consent.  The   Hungarian  government voted  to   depose   him.  Jellachich  replied   by   convoking  at   Agram the   Estates  of   the   triple   Croat-Slavonic-Dalmatian  kingdom  in accordance  with  the   wishes  of   Croatian  patriots.  But   the   Dalmatians sent   their   deputies   to   Vienna,  and   the   Slavonians  to Pesth;  only   the   Croat  deputies  came;  they   demanded  a   southern Slav  kingdom  with  a  separate  ministry.  The  government  was dissatisfied,  and   sent  an  order  to   Jellachich  to   appear   before  the Emperor  at   Innsbruck  and  explain  his   conduct.  Jellachich,  at Innsbruck,  regained  the  confidence  of   the   government  by   addressing to   the   southern  Slavs  who  were  fighting  in   the   Italian army  a   manifesto,  urging   them  to   serve  their  Emperor  faithfully. The  government  after  that  avoided  upholding  the  Magyars against  the   Croats.

The  Servians  rebelled  against  the  Hungarian  government. In   May   their   religious  leader,   the   Metropolitan,  had   convoked  at Carlowitz  an  assembly  which  decided  to   establish  a   national  gov-

ernment  and  to   join   the   Croats.  They   then   appointed  a   national committee,  opened  the  war  again,  and  drove  out  the  Hungarians.

Even  the   Roumanians,  peasants  possessing  no  political  interests, revolted  in   Transylvania  against   their   Magyar   and   German masters;  they   held  a  great  mass-meeting  (of   40,000  men,  it   is said)   and   demanded  equality  with  the   other  nations.  To   oppose this   movement  by   the   Roumanian  peasants,  the   Germans  made common  cause  with  the   Magyars,  and  the  provincial  Estates voted  the   union  of   Transylvania  and   Hungary  (May   30).

Meanwhile  the  Italian  provinces  of   the   Empire  revolted  and joined   the   kingdom  of   Sardinia  (see   p.   340).

The  Civil  War  and   the   Eepression. - The   Austrian  government, deficient  in   information  and   incapable  of   firm   and   decisive  action, had  become  stupefied  by   the  revolution;  it   had  resigned  its powers  to  the   liberal  and   national  parties,  of   whose  weakness it   knew  nothing.  When  it   finally   suspected  the   truth,   it   began to   seize   its   powers   back  by   force.  It   asked  aid   from  the   army, which  hated  the   revolutionists,  and  from  the   Slavic  peoples,  as enemies  to   the   Germans  and  Magyars.  Two  generals  managed the   work  of   putting   down  the   revolt;  Radetzky,  commander  of the   army   in   Italy,   and   Prince  Windischgraetz,  head  of   all   the other  Austrian  armies.  The  central  government  gave  them  a sort  of   dictatorship  to   get   the   territory   from  the   local   revolutionary governments;  the   revolutionists  made  armed  resistance,  and the   revolution  ended  in   civil   war.  This  gave   the   opportunity  for the   government  to   crush  the   liberal  and   national  parties   and   reestablish absolutism.  The   Slavs   aided  the   government  through their  hatred  of   the   ruling   nations,  Germans  and  Magyars,  who formed  the   revolutionary  parties.

The  conquest  began   with  Bohemia.  The  Czechs  detested  the head  of   the   army   in   Bohemia,  Windischgraetz,  as  an  aristocrat and  absolutist;  a   mass-meeting  agreed  to   ask   the   authorities  at Vienna  to   recall  him;   then  the   Czech  militia  at   Prague   made  a riot   before  his   house;   they   shot   through   the   windows,  and   killed the   prince's   wife   (June   12).   There  was   fighting   in   the   streets  of Prague.  Windischgraetz  first  withdrew  on  the  request  of   the government  at   Vienna,  then  returned,  bombarded  the   city,   and put   down  the   Czech  revolt  (June   17).   The  Panslavic  Congress broke  up,  and   the   provincial  Estates  did   not  meet  again.  Bohemia was   placed   under   martial  law.   Windischgraetz,  vanquisher of   the   revolution,  gained  the   confidence  of   the   court,  which

secretly  appointed  him  commander-in-chief  of   all   the  imperial troops.

In   Italy,   Radetzky,  after  conquering  the   Sardinians,  won  back Lombardy  (July,   1848).

The  government  felt   itself  strong  enough  to   break  with  the Hungarian  revolutionists.  It   restored  to  the  Palatine  his   full powers,  refused  to   sanction  the   military  and  financial  measures passed  by   the   Diet,   ordered  a   cessation  of   hostilities  against   the Servians,  and  declared  that  the   concessions  made  to   Hungary would  not   be   allowed  without  the   consent  of   the   other  nations  of the  Empire.  In   his   manifesto  of   June   10  the  Emperor  had sworn  to  uphold  the   honour  of   the   crown  of   Hungary.  The Magyar  national  party   demanded  that  this  oath  should  be   kept, and  the  Diet  sent  a   delegation  of   100  members  to   beg   the Emperor  to  come  to   Pesth.  But  the   Austrian  government  had decided  to  use  the   Slavs  against  the   Magyars;  Jellachich,  restored to   his   powers,  marched  upon   Pesth  with  40,000  Croats. The  Palatine  met  Jellachich  on  the   border  of   Lake  Balaton  and proposed  an   interview  on   board  of   his   steamship.  Jellachich refused,  because  "   the   machinery  of   the   boat  might,   against   the Prince's  will,   be   stronger  than   hi's   word  of   honour."  The   Palatine resigned   his   powers  and   left   Hungary  (September  24). Meanwhile,  at   Pesth  the   democratic  party   gained   the   upper   hand and  the   Diet  appointed  a   committee  to   defend  the   country  (September 22);   Kossuth,  one  of   the   six   members  of   the   committee, became  the   actual  head  of   the   Hungarian  government.

The  government  at   Vienna,  taking  part  openly  against  the Magyars,  forbade  the   Hungarian  troops  to   attack  Jellachich,  and sent  an   Austrian  general,  Lambert,  to   take  command  of   all   the troops  in   Hungary;  his   appointment  was  not  countersigned  by any  of   the   Hungarian  ministers,  which  rendered  it   void  according to   the   new  constitution.  The   Diet  at   Pesth  declared  it   high treason  if   Lambert  should  accept  this   illegal   nomination.  Lambert went   to   Pesth   to   ask   the   signature   of   the   first   minister,  failed to   get   it,   was  overtaken  by   the   mob,   and   assassinated  (September 28).   Jellachich,  in   withdrawing,  lost   10,000  men,  who  were  surrounded and   taken   by   the   Magyar  army. 27

This  was  the   rupture.  The  government  at   Vienna  chose  as the   King's   lieutenant  in   Hungary  the   Magyar's  enemy,   Jellachich, declared  Hungary  in   a   state  of   war,  and   the   Hungarian  Diet   dissolved (October   3).   It   then   ordered  the   Viennese  troops  to march  upon   Hungary.

27

## 4' 8       AUSTRIAN  EMPIRE    UNDER  ABSOLUTIST  SYSTEM.

The  war  against  the   Magyars  brought  on  civil  war   in   the   German countries.  There  had  already  been  trouble  between  the German  deputies  and  those  of   the   Slavic  countries  who  controlleM  a   majority  in   the   Assembly;  trouble  between  the   ministry and  the   democratic  party.  The  committee  of   safety   had  been dissolved  (August  3),   but   the   agitation  in   the   streets  and   clubs continued.  A   central  committee  was  formed  against  the   democratic societies.  The   defiant  attitude  of   the   Viennese  liberals against  the   Magyar  aristocrats  was  abandoned  when  Kossuth and   the   democrats  took  charge   of   affairs  in   Hungary.  The   Germans and   Magyars,  hitherto  bitter  rivals,   joined   forces  against their   common  enemies,  the   government  and  the   Slavs.

A   Viennese  regiment  received  the   order  to   march  upon   Hungary and   refused  to   obey   it;   Latour,  minister  of   war,   in   order  to enforce  the   march,  sent  a   Slavic  regiment  from  Galicia;  a   battle ensued  between  the  soldiers;  the   suburban  workingmen  joined the   rebels  and   helped   them  to   victory.  A   mob  surrounded  Latour's  house,  where  the   ministry  was  holding  a  meeting,  called him  out,   and   hanged   him   (October  6).   The   Emperor  fled   during the   night   to   seek   the   protection  of   the   Slavs  at   Olmiitz  in   Moravia; thence  an   imperial  manifesto  summoned  the   Austrian peoples  to   arms  against  the   revolution.

Then  began   war  against  both  the   German  democrats  in   Vienna and  the   Magyars  in   Hungary.  The  campaign  against  Vienna was  short.  Jellachich  arrived  from  the   east  with  his   Croat  army, Windischgraetz  from  the   north  with  his   Bohemian  army   (October 26);   the   democratic  societies,  which  were  now  the   only   power, tried   to   defend  Vienna  by   means  of   a   garde   mobile;   but   on   October 30,   on   the   advice  of   the   commander-in-chief,  the   municipal council  decided  to   arrange  a  capitulation.  Just   then  the   Hungarian army,   coming   to   aid   Vienna,   arrived  before  the   city   and attacked  Jellachich;  the   defenders  inside  the   city   began   to   fight again.  The  Hungarians  were  driven  back,  however;  Windischgraetz fired   on   the   city,   then   took   armed  possession  of   it.   He declared  Vienna  under  martial  law.  Councils  of   war  had  the democratic  chiefs  shot,   and   .with  them  Blum,  one  of   the   German envoys  sent  by   the   Frankfort  parliament  to   please   the   liberals. Vienna  remained  under  a  reign   of   terror  in   the   hands  of   soldiers and   spies.

The   Austrian  Assembly  was  transferred  to   Slavic  territory,  at Kremsier  near  Olmiitz,  and  reopened  on   November  22.  The government  restored  its   absolute  system;  the  new  ministry  of

November  2t,   under  Prince  Schwartzenberg,  a   conservative  and man  of   the   world,  busied  the   Assembly  with  discussions  of   the general  principles  of   a   constitution  that   was  never  voted.

The  Hungarian  War. - The  campaign  against  Hungary  was much  longer.  The  Hungarians  formed  an  organized  nation, and  this   was  an  actual  war  between  two  governments  and  two armies.

The  Austrian  government  quashed  the   Diet's  decrees,  declared Kossuth  and  his   associates  guilty   of   high   treason,  and   conferred on   Windischgraetz  the   command  over  all   Hungary  (November). Then,  feeling  itself  restrained  by   the   Emperor's  oath  to   respect the   Constitution  of   Hungary,  it   got   rid   of   it   through  a   trick: the   oath  was  considered  as  personally  taken  by   Ferdinand;  he was  made  to  abdicate  (December  2),   and  his   nephew,  Francis Joseph,  succeeded  him.  The  new  Emperor,  bound  by   no  oath, would  be   free  to   violate  the   constitution.  In   December,  1848, his  armies  invaded  Hungary  through  Galicia,  Moravia,  the Danube,  and  Styria.  The  Diet  and  the  committee  of   defence, feeling  themselves  in   danger  in   Pesth,  withdrew  to   Debreczin, behind  the   marshes  of   the   Theiss  (January  4,   1849).   The  Hungarian armies,   after   two   months  of   manoeuvring,  under  a   Polish commander,  Dembinski,  were  driven  behind  the  Theiss.

The  Hungarians  were  relieved  by   a   diversion:  a   Pole,   named Bern,   one  of   the   defenders  of   Vienna,  collected  an  army   in   Transylvania, and   reconquered  the   country  from  the   Roumanian militia.  The  Servians  were  .discontented  with  the   Constitution of   March  4,   1849,   anc^   ceased  fighting  the   Hungarians.

The  Hungarian  army,  increased  to  50,000  men,  took  the  offensive, crossed   the   Theiss,   drove   back   Windischgraetz,  and   freed almost  the   whole  of   Hungary.  The  Diet,   led   by   Kossuth,  declared Hungary   separated  from  the   Austrian  monarchy;  it   then proclaimed  the   Hungarian  Republic,  with  Kossuth  as   President.

The  Emperor,  having  failed  in   his   attempt  to   employ  the   Austrian Slavs   against   Hungary,  appealed  to   the   foreign   Slavs.  He asked  help   from  the   Tsar  of   Russia  against  the   "   party  of   the European  revolution."  Nicholas,  out  of   hatred  to  the   revolution, consented,  and   it   was  a   Russian  army   that   was  charged with  the  conquest  of   Hungary.  Paskiewitch  entered  with 80,000  men  through  the  Carpathians  (June  14).   The  Hungarian armies   moved  back   to   Arad;   the   principal  army   (23,000 men)   preferred  to   surrender  to   Russia  rather  than  to   Austria;  it capitulated  at   Vilagos  (August  13).   Kossuth  and  those  v;ho

## 420       AUSTRIAN  EMPIRE    UNDER  ABSOLUTIST  SYSTEM.

could  escape  fled   to   Turkey.  The  war  of   repression  shed   much blood.  The  councils  of   war  condemned  the  officers  to   be hanged  and  the  first  minister  to   be   shot.  Many   patriots  were imprisoned,  incorporated  in   the   Austrian  army,  or  exiled.

In   Austria,  the   Constituent  Assembly,  moved  to   Kremsier, had  divided  into  a   German  liberal  Left  and   a   Czech  ministerial Right;  it   was  to   consider  a   liberal  plan   of   constitution,  drafted by   a   committee  on   March  2.   But  all   the   former  powers,  the court,  the   nobles,  officers,  and   clergy,   demanded  that   the   minstry should  put   a   stop   to   what  they   called  "   a   parliamentary  game." The  ministry  suddenly  presented  a  constitution,  granted  by   the government,  which  even  the  Right  found  too  conservative (March  6).   The  next  day   the   deputies  found  their  hall  occupied, and   in   the   streets  an   imperial   manifesto  declaring  the   Diet to   be   dissolved  "   for   having   placed   itself  in   contradiction  with the   actual  conditions  of   the   monarchy."  A   constitution  granted by   the   government  and  dated  March  4   was  published  for   the whole  empire;  it   declared  all   the   nations  of   the   monarchy  equal among  themselves,  and  established  a  constitutional  system,  with a   Diet  composed  of   deputies  from  all   the   provinces,  and  a  responsible ministry.   This   constitution  of   March  4,   1849,   was never  applied,  and  on   December  31,  1851,   an   imperial  decree declared  it   abrogated  in   the   name  "   of   the   unity   of   the   Empire and  monarchical  principles."

The  Absolutist  Restoration  of   1849. - The  revolution  of   1848 had  been  democratic,  constitutional,  and  nationalist.  The  victorious government  restored  its   absolutist  and  centralized system.

In   Hungary,  the  government  declared  that  the  nation,  by its   late   revolt,   had   sacrificed  its   former  constitution  and  must come  under  the   common  Constitution  of   March  4.   In   reality it   regarded  neither  one  nor  the   other;   it   restored  its   old   system of   absolutism  and  centralization.  All   the   annexations  to  the kingdom,  Transylvania,  Croatia,  and  the   Servian  country,  were detached  and  organized  under  special  administrations;  the   kingdom itself   was  cut   into   five   governments.  There  was  no   longer a   Diet   nor  county  assemblies  ; Hungary  was  governed  by   officials sent   from  Vienna,  Germans  and  especially  Czechs.

The  reaction  of   1849   was  not  a   simple   restoration  of   the   system overturned  in   1848.   A   part   of   the   regime   destroyed  by   the revolution  could  not   be   restored  and   a  part   was  transformed  in order  to   resist  revolutionary  movements  more  successfully.

What  remained  destroyed  was  the   aristocratic  system.  Seigniorial rights   were  not   restored,  nor  unequal   taxation,  nor  provincial administration  by   the   nobility.  While  the   reorganization of   the   government  was  being   discussed,  Windischgraetz  wrote: "A  monarchy  cannot  exist  without  its   nobility;  it   is   useless  to seek  other  elements  to  support  the  monarchical  principle." Schwartzenberg  replied:  "How  desirable  it   would  be   to   let   the aristocratic  element  predominate  in   the   new  form  of   our  state, no  one  realizes  more  than  I.   But  as   forms  can  take  life   and force  only   through  individuals,  I   see  no  way   to   realize  this   desire. I   do   not   know  in   our  class  a   dozen  men  of   sufficient  political intelligence  and  provided  with  the   necessary  knowledge  to   intrust to   them  an   important  part   of   the   power  without  fearing   that they   would  soon  lose   it.   .   .   Democracy  must  be   combatted  .   .   . but   the   government  alone  can   do   it;   for   an  ally   as  weak  as  our aristocracy  unfortunately  injures  the   cause  more  than  it   serves it."  In   default  of   the   aristocracy,  the   power  was   intrusted  to office-holders.

The  paternal  and   negligent  despotism  of   Metternich's  time  had neither  foreseen  nor  prevented  the   revolution.  The  restoration government  became  systematically  absolutist.  The  ministers concentrated  their  powers  and  governed  directly.  The  laws passed  by   the   assemblies  of   1848   were  abolished,  and   the   special measures  taken  by   the   government  during   the   civil   war  remained in   force;   Austria  was  under  a   "   provisional  government  "   for   ten years.

The  government  systematically  punished  all   the   nations  that had  taken  part   in   the   revolution.  An   imperial  manifesto  announced the   intention  of   "   uniting   in   one  great   state  all   the   countries and   races  of   the   monarchy."  In   place   of   the   former  dualism a   centralized  military  system  was  to   be   created;  the   kingdoms, especially   Hungary,  became  provinces  under  a  single administration.  The  centre  was  at   Vienna,  in   German  territory; thus  the   policy   of   centralization  led   to   the   establishment  of   German as   the   universal  language  of   the   Empire,   and   to   the   giving of   the   administration  into  the   hands  of   German  officials.  The Czechs,  who  had  been  government  allies  against  the   revolution, had  their  share  of   power  also. ism

The   Concordat  of   1855. - Schwartzenberg  had   died   in   1852,   and the   first   minister  was  now   Baron  Zach,   a   liberal  in   the   year  1848, but   converted  to   absolutism.  He   was  supported  by   the   enemies of   the   revolution,  the   officials  and   clergy.

## 422      AUSTRIAN  EMPIRE    UNDER  ABSOLUTIST  SYSTEM.

Until  1848   Austria  had  preserved  Josephism;  since  Joseph  II. the   Church  had  been  subordinate  to   the   state;  the   prelates  were appointed  by   the  government  and  watched  like  officials  of   the government.  The  court  was  religious,  but   devoutness  was  only employed  as  a   means  of   advancement  for   employees  and   officers. Zach  saw   in   the   clergy   a   natural  ally   against   liberal  and   national revolution.  The  general  assembly  of   the   32   Austrian  bishops at   Vienna  had  condemned  political  liberty  as   "   impious  "   and declared  that  nationality  was  only   a   relic  of   paganism,  because the   different  tongues  arose  from  the   tower  of   Babel.

The  absolutist  government  allied  itself  with  the   clergy.  It granted  Catholicism  the   privilege  of   being   the   state  religion  and recognised  in   the   bishops  an  official  power  over  believers.  To make  this   system   definite,  the   government  signed   with  the   Pope the   Concordat  of   1855.   This  was  the   official  fall   of   Josephism.

The  previous  ecclesiastical  organization  rested  on  the   state's absolute  right   to   regulate  its   relations  with   the   Church,  according to   secular  law.  The   Concordat  offered  the   inverse  principle: "   The   Catholic,  apostolic,  and   Roman  religion  will   always   exercise all   over  the   Empire  the   rights   and   privileges  to   which  it   is entitled  by   divine  institution  and   canon  law   "   (Article  i).   This meant  to  recognise  in   the   Church  the  right   of   regulating  its relations  with  the   state  according  to   ecclesiastical  law;   the   situation was  reversed.

The  government  consequently  recognised  in   the   bishops  not only   the   liberty   of   direct  communication  with  the   Holy   See   and of   publishing  acts  of   ecclesiastical  power,  without  state  authorization, but   the   power  to   oversee  the   schools,*  exercise  the   censorship of   books, f   regulate  marriage  affairs,  and   to   ask   the   secular power  to   apply   the   disciplinary  punishments  of   the   Church.  The Holy   See   consented,  through  tolerance,  "   considering  the   times," to   recognise  civil  and  criminal  jurisdiction  of   the   courts  over ecclesiastics,  but   the   clerks  must  always   bear  their  punishment

*"   All   instruction  of   Catholic  youth   in   all   schools,  whether  public  or private,  shall  conform  to  the  doctrine  of   Catholicism.  The  bishops,  by virtue  of   the   rights   proper  to   their  office,   shall  direct  the  education  of youth  in   all   places   of   instruction,  whether  public   or  private,  and  shall  see that  in   all   branches  of   education  there  is   nothing  contrary  to   the   Catholic religion  and  morals."

f "   The   bishops  shall  freely   exercise  their  proper  authority  in   subjecting to   censorship  all   books  which  threaten  religion  and  morals,  and  forbid believers  to   read  them  ;   but  the  government  shall  take  the  necessary measures  to   prevent  the  publication  of   such  books."

in   cells   apart   from  the   lay   prisoners."  The  Church  had   the right   to   acquire   landed  property,  the   ownership  of   which  was   declared inviolable.

The  measures  taken  at   the   conference  between  the   bishops  and government  delegates  (1856)   gave   the   bishops  full   authority  over their  clergy,   the   faithful,  and   Church  schools  and   possessions.

Thus  was  completed  the   centralized  absolutist  and  ecclesiastical system,  which  lasted  until  1859.   All   political  life   ceased  in Austria  for   ten  years.  The  finances  remained  in   disorder;  between 1847   and   1857   the   debt   increased  by   a   billion  florins;  it was  raised  to  2,400,000,000.  In   spite   of   the   increase  in   taxes, the   yearly   deficit  grew   larger;   in   1859   it   amounted  to   280,000,000 florins.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.*

BIBLIOGRAPHY.- In  addition  to  Waitz,  "   Quellenktmde,"  mentioned under  chap.  xii.   :   Krones,  "   Grundriss  der   Oesterr.  Gesch.,"  1882,  gives   a detailed  bibl.  of   works  published  before  1881.

DOCUMENTS. - The  chief  official  documents  are  fragments  published in   Metternich,  "   Nachgelassene  Papiere,''  8   vols.,  1880-84  (there   is   a   French edit.)  ;   the  reports  of   the  Reichstag  committee  of   1848-49  published  by Springer,  1885.

Among  letters  and  memoirs,  see  especially:  Metternich.,- Gentz ; L.   von Wirkner,  "   Meine  Erlebnisse  (1825-52),"  1879. - Prokesch  von  Osten,  "   Aus den  Briefen  (1849-55),"  1896,   letters  from  the   ministers  in   the   reactionary period.

WORKS.- The  best  complete  history  so  far  is   A. Springer,  "Gesch. Oesterr.,"  2   vols.,   1865   ("   Staatengesch.  der   Neuesten  Zeit  "   coll.)   German Liberal.- Krones,  "   Grundriss  der  Oesterr.  Gesch.,"  1882,  and  "   Gesch.  der Neuzeit  Oesterreichs,"  1879   ;   exact,  but   uninteresting. - In   French,  I.   Leger, "   Hist,  de   1'Autriche-Hongrie,"  4th   edit.  (1895),   federalist  and  Slavophil, one  of   the   best   histories  of   the   Duruy   coll.,   containing  a   picked   bibl. Wurzbach,  "   Biographisches  Lexicon  des   K.   Oesterreichs,"  60   vols.,   1856-91, inferior  to   the   "   Allgemeine  Deutsche  Biographic."

ON  THE  REACTIONARY  PERIOD:  W.   Rogge,  "Oesterr.  von  Vilagos  bis   zur Gegenwart,"  vol.  i.,   1872,   work  of   a   journalist.

ON  THE  REVOLUTION  OF  '48:  G.   A.   von   Helfert,  "Gesch.  Oesterr.,"  etc., 4   vols.,   1869-86,  very  conservative. - Iranyi  and  Chassin,  "   Hist.  Polit.  de   la Revol.  de   Hongrie,"  2   vols.,  1859,   very   Magyar.

ON  FINANCE:  Beer,   "   Gesch.  der  Oesterr.  Finanzen  im   XlXten  Jahrh.," 1877.

ON  THE  PEASANT  EMANCIPATION  :   See  "   Handworterbuch  der  Staatswissenschaften,"  under  the  word  "   Bauernbefreiung."

*   On   the   character  given   to   this   bibl.   see  note  to   bibl.   of   chap.   xii.

## CHAPTER   XIV.

## THE    KINGDOM    OF    PRUSSIA    BEFORE   WILLIAM    I.

ALTHOUGH  the  Kingdom  of   Prussia  had  nearly  all   of   its   territory within   the   German  Confederation,  it   has   had   a   development so   distinct  as   to   deserve  separate  study,   and   has   played so   important  a   part   as   to   make  it   necessary  to   record  its   history apart   from  that   of   the   other  states.

Prussian  Reforms  during  the  Wars  of   Napoleon. - Unlike  the rest  of   Germany,  Prussia  had  not  passed  under  the   domination or  influence  of   France.  Though  conquered,  dismembered, forced  to   pay   a   war  contribution,  and   occupied  by   the   armies  of Napoleon,  she   had   remained  an   independent  state.  King   Frederick William  III.   had   refused  to   enter  the   Confederation  of   the Rhine,  and  had  kept   intact  his   sovereign  power.  Yet   his   kingdom emerged   from  this   crisis  revolutionized.  In   order  to   make head  against  Napoleon,  he   had  himself  transformed  the   whole internal  organization  of   Prussia.

The  Prussian  state,  as   its   founders,  Frederick  William  I.   and Frederick  II. , had  fashioned  it,   was  an  absolute  military  monarchy, aristocratic  and   bureaucratic,  governed  by   colleges  of directors  (a   species   of   collective  ministries)  and   administered  by royal   officers  without  any   control  on   the   part   of   the   people.  Society was   divided  into   three   hereditary  classes - nobles,  citizens, and  peasants;  the   Prussian  code  of   laws,   the   Landrecht,  promulgated in   1794,  recognised  this  division.  All   civil  and  military offices  were  reserved  for   nobles.  The  peasants  were  subject  to the   authority  of   the   titled  landowners;  every  noble  had   the   right of   justice   and   police   over  the   inhabitants  of   his   domain.

The  disaster  of   1806  which,  rightly   or  wrongly,  was  attributed to   this   organization,  led   the   King   to   try   the   experiment  of   a   new system.  The  reformers  who  proposed  it   to   him  were  not   Prussian subjects,   but   Germans  from  districts  subject   to   the   French: two  Hanoverians  (Scharnhorst  and  Hardenberg)  and  a   baron  of the   Empire  (Stein);  the   old   Prussian  bureaucrats  regarded  them with  contempt,  and  even  treated  them  as   Jacobins.  As   for   the

King   himself,  it   was  only   with   hesitations,  restrictions,  and   backward steps   that   he   allowed  their   plans   to   go   into   effect.  Stein was  dismissed  in   January,  1807,   taken  back  in   October,  1807, and  finally   dismissed  in   November,  1808.  It   was  not  till   June, 1810,   that   Hardenberg  was  given   control.  Except  in   the   army, the   reforms,  opposed  by   the   nobles  and  the   official  class,   were left   uncompleted.  They   were  sufficient,  however,  to   lift   Prussia out  of   her   old   regime.

The  innovators,  though  treated  in   Prussia  as  revolutionists, appealed  to   wholly   different  principles  from  those  of   the   French revolutionists.  In   France  popular  sovereignty  and  the  rights of   the   citizens  were  put   at   the   front;   a   system  was  to   be   organized in   which  the   French  were  to   be   free   and   equal,   because  they had  a   right   to   be   so.   In   Prussia  the   King   kept   full   sovereignty, making  the  reforms  on   his   own  exclusive  authority,  by   royal ordinances,  and   speaking  to   his   subjects  only   of   their   duty.   The object   in   view   was  not  to   better  the   condition  of   the   people,   but to   demand  of   them  a   new  effort  to   rescue  the   state  from  the   ruin caused  by   the   French  invasion.  Yet   these  two  movements,  setting out   from   opposite   principles,  made  appeal   to   the   same  feeling,- love   of   country, - and   they   led   in   practice  to   analogous reforms.  In   order  to   render  the   subjects  more  capable  of   contributing to   the   needs  of   the   state,   the   King   decided  to   remove the   trammels  on   their  industry  by   giving   them  individual  liberty and  equality;  and   in   order  to   interest  them  in   public   affairs,  he was  led   to   give   them  a   share  in   managing  them.  As   was  said by   Hardenberg,  it   was  "   a  revolution  in   the   best  sense,"  come from  above,  a   "   royal   night   of   the   4th   of   August,"   a   "   monarchical government  with  democratic  principles."

The  general  direction  of   affairs,  up   to  that  time  vaguely shared  between  ministerial  boards,  was  rearranged  in   1810,  on the   English  and   French  model;  there  were  to   be   five   ministers, each  at   the   head   of   a   service  (Interior,  Finances,  Foreign   Affairs, War,  and   Justice),  with  a   chancellor  as  prime   minister  and   president of   the   council.  The  chancellor,  the   ministers,  and  certain high   military  officers,  meeting  as  a   Cabinet,  were  to  consider general  questions ;   the   King   retained  in   his   own   hands  the   power of   sovereign  decision.

The  subjects,  up   to   that   time  without  part   in   public   affairs, were  now  called  on  to   take  a   hand,   if   not   in   government,  at   least in   administration.  In   each  city   a   council  was   instituted,  elected by   the   inhabitants  owning  property  or   in   receipt   of   a   certain  in-

come;  also  an  executive  committee  (Magistral},  some  of   whose members  were  elected  for   a   long   term  and   received  salaries.  The Council  was  empowered  to  control  the   city   expenditures  and   to impose  the   taxes.  The  state  supervision  was  confined  to   auditing their   accounts  and   approving  their  regulations.  At   that   time of   paternal  government,  this  autonomy  granted  to   the   cities  of Prussia  caused  them  to   be   nicknamed  "   little  republics."

Stein  proposed  to   reform  the   administration  of   the   provinces in   the   same  way,   by   intrusting  it   to   elected  representatives;  but he   could  not   bring   the   King   to   consent.  The   "   Chamber  of   War and  the   Domain,"  which  had  held  the   control  of   each  province, was  replaced  by   a  more  regularly  organized  Board  of   Government (Regierung),  divided  into  two  sections,  the   one  administrative and   the   other   economic,  but   composed  wholly   of   royal officers.

Hardenberg,  who  went  on  with  the   reforms,  was  content  to copy   French  institutions.  He  created  in   1812  a  gendarmerie (mounted  police)  whose  superior  officers  were  to   aid   the   administrative officials.  The   reform  of   the   administration  of   the   Circles (Kreise)  was  promulgated  in   1812,   but   was  not  put   in   force.

Hardenberg  also  imitated  the   new  French  methods  of   taxation  : He  copied  the  license  fees  and  the  personal  tax,  secularized church  property,  sold  crown  lands,  levied  taxes  on   luxuries (horses,  carriages,  liveried  servants).

The  most  far-reaching  of   these  reforms  was  the   abolition  of the   official  classification  of   the   people.  In   principle  it   was  contained in   the   decree  of   1807,   which  permitted  nobles  to   enter  on professional  and  business  careers,  and  citizens  and  peasants  to change  their  status  of   birth.  The  full   liberty   of   industry  and residence  followed  in   1808:  "No  man  shall  be   restricted  in   the enjoyment  of   his   property,  his   civil   rights,   and   his   liberty   further than  is   necessary  for   the   general  welfare  of   the   state;   law   and administration  have  no  other  mission  than  the  removal  of   all obstacles  to   the   free   development  of   the   faculties  and   powers  of the   citizens."

Industrial  liberty  was  completed  by   a   fiscal  measure.  The decree  fixing   the   new  taxes  on  trades  and   occupations  abolished the   monopolies  of   the   industrial  corporations  and  towns;  whoever paid   the   license   fee   was   free   to   follow  the   occupation  everywhere (1810). ever

The  emancipation  of   the   peasants,  a  more  complicated  operation, had   been   promised  and   begun,   but   remained  incomplete.

There  were  two  classes  of   peasants,  those  on  the   Royal   estates and  those  on  the  estates  of   the  nobles.  Both  classes  were merely  tenants  and,   in   law,   "   subjects,"  that   is   to   say,   attached  to the   soil   and   bound  to   perform  services  for   the   owner.  The   peasants on   the   Crown  lands  had,   in   fact,   become,  as  early   as   the end  of   the   eighteenth  century,  true  hereditary  landowners,  freed from  the  obligations  of   serfdom.  The  peasants  on  the   noble estates,  however,  had  remained  in   their  previous  condition,  attached to   the   soil,   and   subject   to   seigniorial  corvee  and   the   duty of   rendering  services.  The  King   had   shrunk  from  emancipating them,  out  of   respect   for   the   property  rights   of   the   nobles.

The  French  administration  of   the   new  Grand  Duchy  of   Warsaw, created  in   1807,   by   emancipating  the   Polish  serfs,   compelled Prussia  to  emancipate  her  own.  The  Prussian  government  at first   thought  only   of   emancipating  those  in   the   provinces  bordering on   Poland ; but   the   King,   on   the   advice  of   Stein,   extended the   measure  to   his   whole  kingdom.  It   abolished  "   hereditary subjection  "   (Erbunterthdnigkeit) ,   and   declared  all   the   people   to   be personally  free  (1807).  But  the  peasants  still  remained  under the   police   and   criminal  jurisdiction  of   the   seigneurs;  the   regulation of   1810  on   domestic  servants  allowed  the   master  to   inflict moderate  chastisement  on  the   members  of   his   household.

After  the   emancipation,  it   was  necessary  to   regulate  the   new condition  of   the   peasantry.  On   the   crown  lands  the   peasants were  given   full   ownership,  paying  therefor  an  annual  charge. The  same  principle  was  applied  in   1811  to   the   estates  of   t&gt;e nobles,  but   in   a   manner  unfavourable  to   the   peasants;  they   were compelled  to   pay   for   their  liberty   by   giving   a   part   of   their   land to   the   seigneur.*

In   this   period   of   half-measures,  there  was  only   one  complete reform - that  of   the   army.  This  was  the   work  of   the   "   Committee on   Military   Reorganization  "   presided  over  by   Scharnhorst,   son  of   a   soldier  who   had   risen   to   be   a   general.  It   adopted squarely  the   principle  of   universal  service:  "All  the   inhabitants

*The  lands  occupied  by   the  serf   shad  belonged  in   law   to   the   seigneurs  ; in   return  for   his   right   of   using   the   land  the   serf   had   owed  various  services to   the   legal   owner.  Now  that  the   services  were  to   cease,  it   would seem  only   reasonable  that  some  compensation  should  be   made  to   the nobles  for   the  loss.  It   may   be   that  the   decree  of   1811  went  too   far   in ordering  that  one-third  of   these  lands  should  be   assigned  to   the   nobles  and only   two-thirds  to   the   peasants.  But  the  principle  seems  unimpeachable, unless  we  are  to   hold  that  the  French  Revolution,  in   confiscating  the seigniorial  rights,  furnished  an  example  to   be   followed  everywhere.- TR.

## 428        THE  KINGDOM  OF  PRUSSIA   BEFORE    WILLIAM  I.

of   the   state  are   its   defenders  by   birth."  All   able-bodied  men were  to   become  soldiers.  As   the   treaty  with  Napoleon  limited the   Prussian  army   to   42,000  men,  this   little   army  was  to   be   made a   school  in   which  the   recruits  should  pass  only   enough  time  to learn  their  drill   and   then   make  room  for   others.  Thus  the   shortterm  service  came  into   the   practice   of   armies ; the   old   professional soldiers  were  replaced  by   young  men,  who   pass   through  the   army before  beginning  active  life,   and   are  ready   to   return  to   it   in   case of   war;   the   officers  alone  are  soldiers  by   profession.  A   national militia  is   incorporated  into   the   nucleus  of   a   standing  army.   This reform  was  not   borrowed  from  France;  it   was  neither  the   requisition of   the   revolution  nor  the   conscription  of   Napoleon;  both the   idea   and   the   name,   Landwehr,  Defence  of   the   Country,  were derived  from  the  Middle  Ages.  But  the  application  led   to  a democratic  revolution.  Instead  of   allowing  educated  young men  of   the   noble  and  middle  class  to  purchase  exemption  or supply  substitutes,  the   law   required  them  to   perform  the   service in   person,  the   object   being   to   raise  the   moral  standard  of   the force.  But  with  such  men  in   the   ranks,   the   old   methods  of   military discipline   became  impossible;  so   the   whippings  and   beatings formerly   in   use  were   forbidden.  Officers  were  to   be   appointed and   promoted  only   after  passing  examination.  The nobles  continued  to   be   preferred  as  officers,  but   they   were  required to   furnish  evidence  of   their  fitness  by   passing  examinations. ings

Political  Life   in   Prussia. - After  the   War  of   Liberation  a   new series  of   reforms  began.  The  reorganized  kingdom  of   1807   to 1815   had   been  cut   down  by   Napoleon  to   four  provinces:  Brandenburg, Pomerania,  Silesia,   and   Prussia.  The  Congress  of Vienna,  besides  enlarging  Pomerania,  added  four  new  provinces -Westphalia,  the  Rhine  Province,  Saxony,  and  Posen.  The Prussian  statesmen  would  have  preferred  to  annex  the  whole Kingdom  of   Saxony,  which  would  have  formed,  with  the  old possessions,  a   compact  territory  (see   p.   5).   As   it   emerged  from the   deliberations  of   the   Congress,  the   kingdom  remained  a heterogeneous  patchwork  which  did   not  even  form  a   continuous territory.  It   lay   in   two  main  divisions  : in   the   east,   the   old   kingdom, enlarged   by   the   addition  of   Posen  and   the   province  of Saxony,  and  itself  cut  up   into  pieces   separated  from  each  other by   the   possessions  of   other  princes;  in   the   west  the   provinces  of Westphalia  and   the   Rhine.  These  latter  were  not  only   separated from  the   rest  of   the   kingdom  by   the   whole  width  of   Hanover,

but   also   differed  from  the   rest   in   their  social  constitution  and   in their  administrative  institutions.

The  east  remained  aristocratic  and  rural.  The  land  was divided  into   about  15,000   knightly  estates  (Ritterguter),  and   into about  25,000   little  communes,  each  consisting  of   a  wretched  village, having   hardly   200   inhabitants  on   the   average   in   the   most easterly  parts.  Except  in   the  cities,  which  were  now  selfgoverned,  the  region  was  still  subject  to   the   nobles,  who  had official  authority  over  the   peasants,  the   right   of   police,   and   of   imposing lighter   punishments,  who  also  still   Icept   the   rights   of patrons  over  the   Church.

The  west,  revolutionized  by   the   French  occupation,  had  become democratic;  every   legal   privilege  had   vanished.  In   the Rhine  Province  it   could  hardly   be   said  there  were  nobles  any more;  social  leadership  there,  as   in   France,  belonged  to  the wealthy  middle  class - manufacturers,  merchants,  landowners, and  lawyers.  The  municipal  system  was  also  that  of   France: city   and   country  had   the   same  form  of   organization.  The  communes, about   4500   in   number,  were  much  larger   than   in   the   east, and  more  capable  of   self-government;  each  had  at   its   head  a Bur   germeister ,   appointed  by   the   government  from  among  its leading  men.  The  Rhine  Province  had,   further,  French  law,   the civil   law   of   the   Code   Napoleon,  public   trials,   and   the   jury   in   criminal cases. come

This  straggling  and  motley  kingdom  had  in   all   less  than 12,000,000  of   inhabitants,  and,   except   in   the   west,  a   soil   naturally poor.  To  keep   it   in   the   position  of   a   great   power  required  a constant  struggle  and   a   rigid   economy.

The  work  of   reorganization,  suspended  during  the   war  of   liberation, was   resumed  after   Waterloo.  The   reforms  adopted   during the   crisis   were  provisional,  incomplete,  and   limited  to   the four  old   provinces.  It   was  now  necessary  to   decide  which  of these  reforms  should  be   retained,  how  they   should  be   completed, and   whether  they   should  be   extended  to   the   new  provinces.  The decision  depended  on  the   King,   and  consequently  on  the   influences which   should  gain   the   ascendancy  over   him.

As   Prussia  had   neither  a   parliament  nor  a   political  press,   her whole  political  life   was  centred  in   the   court  and   the   high   officers surrounding  the  King.  Now,  there  was  at  this  time  a  great division  of   opinion   in   this   circle  of   advisers.  An   old-regime  party condemned  as  revolutionary  the  reforms  already  made:  some wished  to  restore  the   uncontrolled  sway  of   the   royal   officers;

## 43°       THE  KINGDOM  OF  PRUSSIA    BEFORE    WILLIAM  I.

others  to  restore  the   authority  of   the   nobles  in   the   rural   districts. In   open  opposition  to  these  absolutist  aristocrats  was a   group  of   supporters  of   the   reforms.  These,  too,   were  divided in   opinion.  Some  wanted  a   liberal  constitutional  system  of   the Tory  or   Louis  XVIII.  pattern  (Humboldt,  Schon,  Vincke); others  (Stein,   Niebuhr,  Gneisenau)  wanted  a   system   founded  on historic  rights.  Hardenberg,  grown  old   and  indolent,  wavered between  these  various  schemes.

The  King,   drawn  this   way  and   that   by   conflicting  influences, adopted  contradictory  decisions,  or  resigned  himself  to   compromises, or   oftener   turned  the   matter  over  to   committee  after   committee without  reaching   any   decision.  The   work  of   reorganization proceeded  very   slowly   therefore.  The   ordinance  regarding city   administration  was  not  published  till   1831;   the   regulations touching  freedom  of   labour  appeared  in   1845;   the   provisions  regarding compensations  for   the   emancipation  of   the   serfs   were not  completed  in   1850;   the   reform  of   the   land   tax  was  only   finished in   1861  ; the   local   administration  of   the   Circles  and   the   rural communes  was  not  fully   organized  until  1872   and  1891.   The revision  of   the   old   laws  (Landrecht),  on  which  a   committee  was still   labouring  in   1847,   nas  never  been   finished.  The   bulk   of   the work  actually  accomplished  was  done  in   the   years  1815   to   1823; the   history   of   it   is   so   intricate  that   I   can  only   describe  the   results.

The  Absolutist  Reforms  (1814-23). - The  mainspring  of   the government  continued  to   be   the   new  creation,  the   Ministry.  By its   side   the   Council  of   State   remained - a   deliberative  body   made up   of   royal   princes,   ministers,  and   high   dignitaries.  According to   the   Ordinance  of   1817,   it   was  to   give   advice  on  changes   of   law and  regulations,  on  conflicts  between  ministers,  and  on  all matters  submitted  to   it   by   the   King.   It   seemed  likely   at   first to   become  the   chief  organ  of   the   government,  but   after  1827   the King   almost  ceased  to  consult  it.   After  Hardenberg  died,   in 1822,   no  new  chancellor  was  appointed.  In   practice  the   ministers, holding   office   for   life,   enjoying   the   King's   confidence  and selected  by   him   at   will,   worked  with   him   and   drafted  his   decrees. It   was  a   government  by   King   and   Cabinet.

For   administrative  purposes  the   kingdom  was  divided  into  ten provinces,  presently  reduced  to   eight.  At   the   head  of   each  was placed  an   Oberpraesident,  a   kind  of   civil  governor.  The  next lower  division  was  the   Besirk,  of   which  there  were  25,   each  with a  governing  board  (Regierung).  Under  these  the  old  local division  into   Circles  was  retained;  of   these  there  were  upward

of   300.   At   the   head   of   each   was  the   Landrath,  a   salaried  officer and  landowner,  obliged  to  pass  the  civil-service  examination, but   selected  from  a   list   prepared  by   the   representative  assembly of   the   Circle  (Kreistag).  The  representative  system  promised  in 1815,   but   kept   back  by   the   conflict  between  the   nobles  and   the official  class,   led   only   to   the   establishment,  in   1825,   of   these   Circle assemblies,  with  purely  consultative  functions,  their  only   real power  being   that   of   nominating  candidates  for   the   post   of   Landrath.  They   were  almost  wholly  aristocratic.  The  communes,  as already  stated,  were  not  reorganized  till   1872.  Each  province retained  its   old   laws   and   customs.

The  decree  of   1810   on   the   redemption  of   the   seigniorial  rights in   the   eastern  provinces  was  interpreted  and  modified  by   the declaration  of   1816  in   a  way  even  more  unfavourable  to  the peasants.  These  were  divided  into  two  classes:  those  who  had the   right   of   redemption,  and   those  who  remained  in   their  former condition.  In   the   first   class  only   those  peasants  were  included whose  holdings  were  sufficient  to  support  a   household;  it   was further  required  that   their  possession  should  be   ancient  and   confirmed by   the   assessment  roll.  Only   these  got   the   right   to   redeem the   dues   and   services  they   owed  to   the   seigneurs  by   payment of   an  equivalent.  From  the   land  they   had  held  as   tenants burdened  with  charges,  they   retained  two-thirds  in   full   ownership if   their  holding  was  hereditary,  one-half  if   it   was  not.  The other  part   went  to  the   seigneur.  The  adjustment  proceeded slowly,   not   being   completed  as   late   as  1848.

All   the   other  peasants - the   great  majority - were  excluded from  the   right   to   claim  the   advantage  of   the   decree.  The   government had   given   them   personal   liberty,   but   was  unwilling  to make  them  peasant  proprietors;  they   must  remain  under  the control  of   the   noble  landlords,  who   needed  them  to   cultivate  their domains.  The  mass  of   the   eastern  peasants,  therefore,  remained as   tenants  of   small  holdings,  living   in   villages  or  on  the   great estates,  cultivating  (often   from  father  to   son)   a   bit   of   land  the use  of   which  the   proprietor  gave   them  in   exchange  for   manual labour.  They   subsisted  in   a   wretched  way,  partly   on   the   products of   their  little   holding,  partly   on  money  earned  as   hired  farm labourers.  But  in   the   eighteenth  century  the   Kings   had  compelled the   seigneurs   to   keep   up   the   number  of   peasant   holdings (Bauernstelle);  since  1816  the  institution  of   peasant  protection (Bauemschuts}  had  been  abandoned.  The  great  landowner was  released  from  the   obligation  to   assist  the   peasants  to   repair

## 43 2        THE  KINGDOM  OF  PRUSSIA    BEFORE    WILLIAM  /.

their  cottages,  to  allow  them  to   take  wood  in   the   forests  and share  the   pasturage;  above  all,   he   had   the   right   to   take   from   the peasants  lands  they   held  on  precarious  title   or   for   a   limited  term. The  result  was  to   enlarge  the   great   domains  at   the   expense  of the   small  holdings  and   to   convert  the   great   majority  of   the   tenants into   mere   day   labourers.  When,   in   1850,   a   law   was  passed to   protect  the   rights   of   tenants  of   this   class,   only   a   few   of   them remained.

Thus  it   has   happened  that,   throughout  the   whole  former  Kingdom of   Prussia,   society   has   continued  to   be   aristocratic.  The great   land-owning  nobles  have  greatly  enlarged  their  domains; only   a   minority  of   the   peasants  have  become  landowners,  even at   the   expense  of   surrendering  a  part   of   their  holdings.  The others  are  only   agricultural  labourers,  employed  by   and  dependent upon   the   great   proprietors.

In   Posen,  where  the   government  made  no  effort  to   humour the   great   landowners,  who  were  Polish  nobles,  the   proprietors were  forbidden  to  suppress  the  peasant  tenures  (1819),  and smaller  payments  were  required  in   redemption  of   the   seigniorial rights ;   the   settlements  also   were  much  more  quickly  made.  But there  also   the   smaller  holders  were  excluded  from  these  benefits.

In   the   western  provinces  the   reform  had   been  already   accomplished, the   peasants  had  become  landowners,  and  rural  society, especially  in   the   Rhine  Province,  was  already  democratic.

The  financial  reorganization  of   the   kingdom  was  effected  between 1815   and   1820.  The   war   had   left   a   floating   debt   and   a yearly   deficit  of   10,000,000  thalers.*  A   five   per   cent,  loan  was negotiated  at   72   (1817).  The  King,   in   order  to   save  the   credit of   the   state,   directed  that   the   debt  operations  should  be   kept secret.  Its   amount  was  set  at   180,000,000  thalers,  with  a   sinkingfund  designed  to  reduce  it.  The  King   pledged  himself  not  to contract  a   further  loan,   "   except  with   the   consent  and   under  the guarantee  of   the   future  assembly  of   the   Estates  of   the   Kingdom  " (1820).

In   order  to   get   rid   of   the   deficit,   the   budget   was  revised  with   an economy  so  rigid   that   the   gross  expenditure  was  reduced  to   about 5,000,000  thalers.  The  King   cut  down  his  personal  expenses to   the   lowest  terms.  He  announced  that  the  budget  should be   published  every  third  year,   in   order  that   everybody  might   see that  not  a  penny  was  demanded  beyond  the  actual  necessities

*The  Prussian  thaler  was  equivalent  to   about  seventy-five  cents.

of   the   state.  As   a   matter  of   fact,   the   accounts  were  not  published till   1829,   and   then   with   inaccurate  figures.

It   was  necessary  to   impose  new  taxes:  in   the   cities  a   tax  on consumption  as   in   Holland  (a   grist   tax  and   a   tax  on  slaughterhouses); in   the   rest  of   the   country  a   personal  tax   by   classes  or graduated  poll-tax  (changed  in   1851   into  an   income  tax).   The readjustment  of   the   customs  duties  led   to   the   formation  of   the Z  ollver ein   (see   p.   452).

A   reform  of   the   general   laws   and   judicial   procedure  was  promised, but   not   carried  out.   Meantime  the   Prussian  Code  of   1794 was  extended  to  three  of   the  new  provinces.  The  government even  made  two  attempts  to   impose  it   on  the  Rhine Province  instead  of   the   French  "   revolutionary  "   code  and   trial by   jury.   The  inhabitants  petitioned  the   King   to   be   allowed  to keep   their  existing  system,  which  was,  with  difficulty,  granted provisionally.

In   relation  to   primary  education,  which  had   been  made  compulsory in   the   eighteenth  century,  the   old   arrangements  were allowed  to   stand.  The  reform  announced  in   1817,   and   prepared in   1819,   was  not  put   into   effect.  The   provisions  of   the   Code   of 1794  were  extended  to   the   new  provinces.  Parents  are  obliged to   send   their   children  to   school;  the   school  is   supported  in   part at   their  expense,  is   placed   under  the   direct  supervision  of   the pastor  or  priest,   and   religious  instruction  is   compulsory.

The  reorganization  of   the   army  was  the   decisive  event  in   the history  of   Prussia.  The  system  hastily   devised  during  the   Napoleonic crisis   was  attacked  by   professional  military   men  on   the ground  that  the   service  was  too  short  to   make  real   soldiers,  and was  disliked  by   the   middle  class  because  it   bore  so   hardly   on young  men  of   good   family.  The  King   adhered  to   the   principle of   universal  service,  and  refused  to   admit  substitutes,  although this   was   done  in   all   other  countries.  The   Berlin  Council  having petitioned  for   exemption,  the  king   threatened  to  publish  the names  of   the   petitioners.  The  service  was   kept   on   the   universal and  compulsory  basis ; but   young  men  who  gave  evidence  of   certain educational  attainments  were  let   off   with  one  year  of   army training,  on  condition  of   supplying  their  own  support  and   equipment. These   are   the   one-year  volunteers.  For   the   other  recruits the   service  was   fixed  at   three  years   in   principle.  This  period, which  at   that  time  seemed  very  short,  was  adopted  in   order  to make  all   young  men  pass   through  the  army  without  too  great expense  to   the   government.  The  active  army  was  reduced  to   the

28

very   low   number  of   115,000  men.  The   men  dismissed  from  the active  army  as   fully   trained  belonged  to   the   reserve  up   to   the   age of   twenty-five.

The  King  hesitated  more  about  keeping  the   Landwehr.  It was  said   to   be   insufficient  for   war  and   dangerous  in   case  of   outbreak. The   liberals  had   compromised  it   by   exalting   it   at   the   expense of   the   active  army;  a   legend   which  lasted  long   in   Europe represented  the  Prussian  victories  of   1813   as   the   work  of   the Landwehr.  The  King  decided  to   keep   the   institution,  but  increased the   length  of   the   yearly   drills  and   arranged  to   have  the men  exercised  in   conjunction  with  the   active  army.  Thus  with a   small  standing  army,   in   keeping  with   its   meagre   budget,   Prussia had   in   time   of   war  a   disposable  force  composed  of   all   her able-bodied  men,  and  naturally  divided  into  three  parts:  the Active  Army,  the   Reserve,  and  the   Landwehr - the   latter  in   two divisions.

This  system,  adopted  later  by   all   Europe,  was  the   most  original feature  of   Prussia.  The   army   becarrie  for   domestic  purposes  the school  in   which  Prussian  national  spirit   was  fostered;  and  toward foreign   nations  it   gave   to   a   state  of   the   second  order  the military  force  and   rank  of   a   great   power.

Creation  of   the   Provincial  Estates  (1815-25). - While  these changes  were  laboriously  proceeding,  court  and  official  circles were  agitated  on  the   great   question  of   the   form  of   government. Up   to   the   crisis   of   1806   Prussia  had   been   an  absolute  monarchy in   which  the   King   had   sovereign  control,  even  in   making  laws and  imposing  taxes.  The  reformers  had  persuaded  Frederick William  III.   to   admit  a   representative  assembly;  he   had   accepted as  early   as  1810   the   principle  of   "   giving   a   representation  to   the nation."  In   1815,   before  the   battle  of   Waterloo,  he   promised  by his   famous  ordinance  of   May   28   to   give   the   Prussian  nation  a written  constitution;  the   first   clause  of   his   ordinance  said:  "There shall   be   formed  a   representation  of   the   people."  The   representatives were   to   be   elected  by   Provincial  Estates.  But,   after  the end   of   the   war,   the   King   hesitated  as   to   the   mode  of   fulfilling   the promise.  He   appointed  in   succession  five   different  committees on   the   subject,   and   took   eight   years   to   arrive  at   a   decision  (181523).

A   strong  party  at   court  condemned  every  sort  of   constitution as  revolutionary.  The  Prince  Royal,  later  Frederick  William IV.,   an   admirer  of   Haller  (see   p.   ooo),   was   for   admitting  only   historical rights   and   detested  written  constitutions.  The  Liberal

party   dwelt  on   the   King's   promise  solemnly  given   in   1815,   but was   divided  as   to   the   proper   form  of   representation  for   the   kingdom. The   King   sent  a   commission  to   learn  the   wishes  of   the provincial  notables.  Meanwhile  he  received  from  Metternich some  suggestions  as   to   the   danger   of   constitutions  and   presently drew  away  from  the  constitutional  party.  The  excitement among  the   students  alarmed  him,   and   he   ordered  a   censorship  of the  universities  and  the  press.  Then  began  the  proceedings against  the  "   demagogues  "   (1819).  Jahn   was  arrested  and Arndt  was  dismissed.  Severities  were  resumed  in   1823;   one hundred  and  twenty  students  were  locked  up   in   fortresses  where they   lay   three  years  without  trial  (see   p.   385).   The   censorship of   books  still   existed  in   Prussia,  but   ordinarily  had   been  exercised with  moderation.  It   now  became  rigorous:  a  new  edition  of Fichte's  "   Address  to   the   German  Nation  "   was   denied  the   right of   publication  by   the   superior  board  of   censors.

The  revolutions  of   1820-21  in   Spain   and   Italy   had   the   effect  of making  constitutional  systems  odious  to  the  King.*  He  rejected Hardenberg's  project   (1821)   and   made  up   his   mind  not  to go   beyond  the  institution  of   the   provincial  assemblies.  The fifth   and   last   committee  on   the   constitution,  presided  over   by   the Prince  Royal,  drew  up   the   scheme  of   representation  which  was enacted  as   law   in   1823.   The   King   did   not   formally   withdraw  his promise  of   1815,   but   he   did   not   keep   it.   Instead  of   a   general representation  of   the  kingdom,  he  granted  only   Provincial Estates.

These  Estates,  fashioned  to   the   taste  of   the   Prince  Royal,   were not  national,  but   provincial ;   not  representative  of   the   people,   but of   classes  and   corporations,  with  power  to   advise  but   not  to   conclude. There   were  eight   of   them - one   for   each   province.  In order  to   emphasize  their  local  character,  they   were  established by   eight   separate  decrees,  almost,  of   course,  identical  in   their terms.  Each  assembly  included  at   least  three  Estates:  nobles, cities,   peasants.  In   four   provinces  (Saxony,  Silesia,  Westphalia, and  the   Rhine  Province)  the   nobles  were  subdivided  into  seigneurs and   chevaliers.  The   seigneurs  sat   in   person;  the   chevaliers, like   the   cities   and   the   peasants,  were  represented  by   deputies elected  for   six   years.   For   voting   in   the   choice  of   city   and

*   I   cannot  enter  into  the   details,  now  well  known,  of   the   contests  within the  government.  Hardenberg,  before  proposing  his  timid  scheme  of   a constitution,  had  come  to   an  understanding  with  the   absolutists  against  the Liberals,  and  had  secured  the   dismissal  of   Humboldt.

## 436        THE  KINGDOM  OF  PRUSSIA    BEFORE    WILLIAM  /.

peasant  deputies,  a  property  qualification  was  required.  The totals  for   the   whole  monarchy  were  278   nobles,  182   citizens,  and 124   deputies  for   the   peasants.

The  three  sets  or   "   estates  "   met  as  one  assembly  in   each province,  and  their  proceedings  were  secret.  Their  functions were  to   give   advice  on   laws  affecting  their   province  and   to   regulate communal  affairs  (highways,  poor-relief).  They   had  no direct  relations  with  the   King's   ministers;  their  communications were  through  a  special  commission,  and  the  King   made  no answer  until  the   whole  eight   had   been  heard  from,   which  meant, in   many  cases,  not  till   after   a   year.

These  assemblies,  which  the   King   declared  to   be   created  in the   spirit   of   the   "   ancient  German  constitution,"  could  be   made up   only   by   manufacturing  new  institutions  for   the   purpose.  The three  or   four   Estates  which  they   were  to   represent  existed  neither in   law   nor   in   the   facts   of   society,   and   even   in   the   provinces  of   the west  it   was  necessary,  in   order  to   fill   up   the   Estate  of   the   nobles, to   admit  thereto  citizen  landowners.

End  of   Frederick  William  IIL's  Reign. - The  system  established between  1815   and  1825   lasted  without  serious  change  till   1848. Prussia  was  an  absolute  and  bureaucratic  monarchy,  like  Austria, with   aristocratic  provincial  estates;  political  life   was  confined to   the   royal   family   and   the   officials.  But   society,   especially in   the   west,  was   in   law   as   democratic  as   in   the   rest  of   western Europe.  The  nobles  had  easier  access  to  public  employments, but   the   non-noble  were  not  excluded.  It   was  a  government  of office-holders.  It   was  long   the   fashion  to   quote  as  characteristic of   the   system  the   answer  of   the   minister  of   the   interior  to   a complaint  of   the   municipal  council  of   Elbing:  it   was  to   the   effect that   the   measures  of   the   government  were  "   above  the   limited  intelligence of   the   subjects."  But   this   governing  body   was   kept   to its   duty   by   strict   rules.  The   Prussian  officials,  selected  by   means of   examinations,  had   slow  promotion  and   hard  work.  Protected against  arbitrary  treatment,  they   acquired  an  esprit   de   corps which  sometimes  made  them  sufficiently  independent  to   maintain their  rights   or  perform  their  duty;   they   had   a   reputation  in   Germany for   pedantic   consciences  and   capacity   for   work.

Public  life   was  little  more  than  administration.  Until  the death  of   Frederick  William  III.,   in   1840,   political  activity  was almost  lacking  among  the  people.  German  historians  say   in explanation  that  the   Prussian  people  loved  their  aged   King   for his   conduct  in   the   evil   days   of   the   French  invasion,  and   shrank

from  disturbing  his   quiet   by   demanding  reforms.  As   a  matter of   fact   the   people   had   no  practical  means  of   expressing  their wishes.  The  King,  as   he   grew  older,  became  more  and  more hostile  to   change,  and   confined  himself  to   the   settlement  of   daily business.  In   the   last   fifteen  years  of   his   reign   the   only   domestic events  of   note  were  the   crusade  against  the   agitators  of   1834 and  the   Church  troubles.  As   a  result  of   the   first,   thirty-nine students  were  sentenced  to   death,  but   were  reprieved  and  confined in   fortresses.

The  Church  troubles  were  twofold.  A   conflict  with  the Lutheran  Church  grew  out  of   a   plan   of   conciliation.  The  King had  expressed  a  wish  to   bring   about  a   Union  between  the Lutheran  and  Calvinistic  churches.  His  proposals  were  accepted by   the   Calvinists  and  the  majority  of   the  Lutherans (1817).  But  after  1830   certain  Lutheran  ministers,  chiefly  in Silesia,  protested  against  the   Union;  they   were,   in   consequence, deprived  and  even  imprisoned  (1832-35);  they   eventually  founded a   separate  church  (1841).

A   conflict  broke  out  with  the   Catholic  Church  in   the   new Catholic  provinces  of   Westphalia  and   the   Rhine,   where  an  opposition grew   up   against   the   Protestant  office-holders.  The   "   revolutionary "   institution  of   civil   marriage  not   being   recognised  in Prussia,  the   clergy   kept   the   registers  of   births  and   deaths  and had  the   sole  right   to   perform  the   marriage  ceremony.  In   the case  of   a   mixed  marriage,  the   canons  of   the   Catholic  Church  forbade the   clergy   to   marry  any   couple   who   would  not   pledge   themselves to   have  their  children  brought  up   in   the   Catholic  faith. N-ow  a   Prussian  law   decreed  that   such  children  should  follow  the religion  of   their  father.  When  this  law  was  extended  to  the Rhine  Province  in   1825,   the   bishops   consulted  the   Pope,   who,   by a   brief   of   1830,   sustained  the   canonical  principle,  but   left   a   way open   for   the   bishops   to   make  a   compromise  with   the   government. It   was  arranged  that   the   priest,   without  blessing  the   mixed  marriage, was   to   make   it   possible  by   his   passive   assistance.  This  was a   procedure  already  in   use   in   the   old   Prussian  duchy   of   Jiilich (Juliers).  This  arrangement,  at   first  accepted,  was  condemned by   the   new  Archbishop  of   Cologne,  then  by   the   Polish  Archbishop of   Posen.  The  Pope   sustained  these  prelates.  The  King, in   anger,   had   them  put   in   prison   and   even  deposed  the   Archbishop of   Posen.

Opening  Years  of   Frederick  William  IV.'s  Seign   (184047). The  Prince  Royal,  at   length   become,  in   his   forty-fifth  year,   King

## 438         THE  KINGDOM  OF  PRUSSIA   BEFORE    WILLIAM  I.

Frederick  William  IV.,   was  already  a   man  of   note  in   Germany  as an  orator  and   a   patron  of   learning.  The   educated  public   looked to   him  for   great  reforms.  He  began  his   reign   with  solemn coronation  ceremonies  (at   Koenigsberg  and   later  at   Berlin).  He pardoned  political  prisoners,  recalled  Jahn,   restored  Arndt  to his   professorship,  and   abolished  the   commission  for   investigating the   political   ideas  of   candidates  for   public   employment.  He   released and   restored  the   imprisoned  prelates.  But,   though   speaking much  and  earnestly,  and  incessantly  forming  plans,   he seldom  reached  a   final  decision  on  great   questions.

He  found  himself  drawn  in   one  direction  by   his   own  ideals and  in   another  by   the   wishes  of   his   subjects.  His   own   ideal  he had  indicated  in   his   coronation  speech.  At   Koenigsberg  he swore  to   be   "   a   just   judge,   a   faithful  prince,   conscientious  and merciful,  a   Christian  King."  He   added,  "   In   our  country  there is   a   union  of   the   head   and   the   members,  of   the   princes   and   the people."  At   Berlin  he   said,   "   I   know  that   I   hold  my   crown  in fief   of   Almighty  God   and   that   I   owe   Him  an  account  of   every moment  of   my  reign.  If   anybody  asks  a  guarantee  for  the future,  I   give   him   this   sentence.  It   is   of   more  weight   and   binds more  strongly  than  all   the   coronation  oaths  and  all   the   parchment pledges."  Then,   addressing  himself  directly  to   the   crowd filling   the   space   in   front  of   the   palace,   he   asked,   "   Will   you   help me  to   bring   into   even  more  brilliant  activity   the   qualities  whereby Prussia,  with  her   fourteen  millions  of   people,  stands  among  the great  powers  of   the   world:  honour,  faithfulness,  struggle  toward light,   right,   and   truth,   stepping  forward  with  the   wisdom  of   age and   at   the   same  time   the   heroic  vigour   of   youth?  Will   you   .   .   . help   me   faithfully  in   good   days   as   in   evil   ones?  Oh,   then,   answer me  with  the   most  beautiful  word  of   our  mother-tongue,  answer me  a   Ja!   [yes]."   To   the   loud   acclaim  of   the   crowd  the   King   replied: " That  Ja!   was   for   me;   it   is   my   own  property  .   .   .   it   binds us   inseparably  in   mutual  love  and   fidelity."

Like  his   friends  of   the   historical  and   romantic  school,   Niebuhr, Savigny,  and  Ranke,  Frederick  William  hated  the  rationalistic and   democratic  French  Revolution,  with  its   popular  sovereignty and  its   paper  constitutions.  His  ideal  was  the   Christian  German state   of   the   Middle  Ages,   as  conceived  by   the   writers  of romance:  the   King   responsible  to   God  alone,  governing  in   accordance with   custom  with   the   aid   of   his   subjects   grouped   in their  traditional  classes,  personally  loved  and  respected  by   all, extending  his   paternal  care  to   all   and   guiding  them  by   divine inspiration. man

The  middle  class  and  some  of   the   nobles  wished  for   a   constitutional system.   The   estates  of   the   province   of   Prussia,   as  early as  1840,   entreated  the   King   "   to   assure  to   his   people   an  assembly of   representatives  of   the   country."  The  Rhine  Province,  neighbour to   the   parliamentary  Kingdom  of   Belgium,  expressed  a similar  wish.  The  question  of   a   national  representation  became the   leading  subject  of   discussion  in   the   press,  the   provincial bodies,  and   the   governing  class.

The  King   promised  in   1840   a   development  of   the   provincial estates.  He   granted  them  a  session  once  in   two  years,  and   the right   of   publishing  their  proceedings.  Then  he   decided,  with some  reluctance,  to   summon  to   Berlin  delegations  elected  by   all the   provincial  estates,  for   consultation  regarding  a   loan.  The decree  of   1820,   fixing   the   limit  of   the   debt,   had   declared  that   no new  loan  should  be   contracted  without  the   consent  of   the   future assembly  of   the   estates  of   the   kingdom.  Money   was  now  needed for  construction  of   railway  lines.  The  united  delegations, consisting  of   46   delegates  of   the   nobles,  32   of   the   cities,   and   20   of the   peasants,  approved  the   building  of   the   proposed  roads,  but did   not  venture  to   assume  the   right   of   burdening  the   nation. The  King,   in   dismissing  them,  took  pains   to   remind  them  that they   ought   to   regard   themselves  as   invested  with  the   rights   of their  estate,   "   not  as  representing  the   wind  of   opinion  and   the doctrines  of   the   day!"  Immediately  afterward  he   appointed  a commission  to  study   the   plan   of   a   constitution.

The  public  was  getting  tired  of   waiting.  The  King   had ordered  a   relaxing  of   the   censorship  (December,  1841).  In   1842 engravings  and  books  were  exempted  from  censure.  The  malcontents took   advantage  of   this   to   ridicule  the   government  in cartoons,  especially  at   Berlin  and   Cologne.  A   famous  caricature appeared - the   King   holding  in   one   hand  an   Order,  in   the   other a   Counter-order,  while  across  his   forehead  the   word  Disorder  was written  (Frederick  William  IV.,   who  died  insane,  already  gave sign?   of   mental  derangement).  The  journalists  were  generally hot-headed  young  people,  believers  in   democracy  and   enemies  of tradition,  whether  aristocratic  or   Christian  (many   of   them  were Jews).  Frederick  William,  wounded  in   his   faith,   did   not   long tolerate  freedom  of   the   press;   he   had   Jacoby,   a   Jew   of   Koenigsberg,   prosecuted - the   result,  however,  was  an  acquittal.  He suppressed  two   journals  for   "   subversive  tendencies  "   (1843)   and established  a   court  of   censorship.  He   even  compelled  the   University of   Berlin  to   stop   the   lectures  of   a   privat-docent,  and   in   an

indignant  letter  against  the   university  for   allowing  this   "   licensed revolutionist  to   endanger  the   loyalty   of   the   students,"  he   declared it   was  necessary  once  for   all   to   conduct  themselves  according  to his   ideas.  The  Minister  of   Public  Worship  dismissed  teachers suspected  of   being   rationalists  or   liberals.  In   1847   he   turned the   celebrated  rationalist  Diesterweg  out  of   the   principalship  of a   normal  school  at   Berlin.

Opinion  among  educated  Germans  turned  against  the   King; the   poets   Heine,  Hervveg,  Freiligrath  attacked  him  or  satirized him.  He  became  enraged  against  this  "   clique,  who  by   speech, writings,  and  cartoons  were  laying   the   axe  to   the   roots  of   German existence;  who  sought   not  the   free  superposition  of   the classes,  but   a   hodge-podge  of   all   classes  "   (letter   to   Bunsen).

The   United  Landtag  of   1847. - By   the   King's   direction,  his   confidential advisers   had   been   considering  the   proper  organization  of States-General  for   the   whole  kingdom.  In   1845   the   matter  was referred  to   a   special   commission.  Later  it   was  withdrawn  from the   commission  and  seriously  discussed  in   the   council  of   ministers. These   deliberations  lasted  till   1847,   an'd   finally   resulted  in the   patent  of   February  3   of   that   year.   This   was  not  the   constitution awaited  by   the   public;   the   King   alone  had   signed   it   in   order to   "   avoid  all   resemblance  to   a   fundamental  law."  The  patent created  a   United  Landtag  which  was  not,  after  all,   the   "   representation of   the   people"  promised  in   1815,   but  only   a  general meeting  at   Berlin  of   all   the   members  of   the   various  Provincial Estates.  It   was  composed,  not  of   representatives  of   the   people, but   of   deputies   of   classes.  They   were  to   sit   together   in   considering financial  questions,  but   for   all   other  matters  they   sat   as   two bodies:  the   curia  of   seigneurs  consisting  of   princes  and  great nobles  (80)   and  the  curia  of   the   three  inferior  estates.  The powers  of   the   Landtag  were  limited  to   the   voting   of   new  taxes and  the   presentation  of   petitions.  The  King   reserved  the   right to   consult  it   in   reference  to   changes   of   law   whenever  he   should see   fit.   The   gathering  was  not  even  made  a   settled  institution, as   the   King   declined  to   pledge   himself  to   convene  it   periodically. He  only   promised  to  convoke,  every   fourth  year,  committees representing  all   the   Provincial  Estates,  for   consultation  on   laws, and   every  year  a   delegation  consisting  of   one  member  from  each province,  to   receive  the   accounts  of   the   national  debt.

The  disappointment  was  general.  All  parties  agreed  in   demanding at   least  a  periodical  meeting  of   the   United  Landtag. At   the   opening  session  of   the   Landtag,  April   n,   the   King   took

pains   to   give   notice,   by   a   solemn  declaration,  "   that   no  power  on earth  could  ever  bring   him  to   change  the   natural  relation  .   .   . between  prince   and   people   into   one  of   convention  or  of   constitution." " I   shall   never  allow  a   sheet   of   paper   drawn  up   as   a   second Providence,  to   be   placed   between  God  and   our  country,  to   make its   paragraphs  our  rulers  and  substitute  them  for   the   ancient faithfulness.  You,   gentlemen,  are  the   German  Estates  (Stdnde) in   the   old   traditional  sense,  that   is   to   say,   you   are   before  all   the representatives  and  defenders  of   your  own  rights,   the   rights   of the   estates.  .   .   You   are   to   exercise  at   once  the   rights   the   Crown has   granted  to   you.   Your  mission  is   not  to   represent  opinions, to   give   effect  to   the   opinions  of   a   period   or  of   a   school.  That would  be   quite   un-German  as  well   as  unfavourable  to   the   general welfare,  for   it   would  lead   to   endless  difficulties  with   the   sovereign, who,  according  to  the   law  of   God  and  of   the   country,  must govern  according  to   his   own  unfettered  judgment  and  not  according to   the   will   of   majorities."  Then  he   adjured  his   loyal Estates  to   help   him   in   combatting  the   spirit   of   revolution  and   unbelief. Then,   suddenly   rising,   he   uttered  the   famous  sentence from  the   Psalmist:  "   As   for   me  and   my   house  we  will   serve  the Lord,  yea!   in   truth."

The  government  asked  for   a  guarantee  of   the   railway  loan. The  Landtag  refused,  and  proceeded  to  adopt  a  petition  for liberty   of   the   press,  control  of   the   finances,  and   above  all   a promise  of   periodical  convocation.  These  requests  the   King   refused. The   Landtag   broke  up   without  having   granted   or  obtained anything,   June,   1847.

The  conflict  between  Frederick  William  and  the   Landtag  began at   once,  with   a   show  of   outward  respect.  The  assembly voted  an  address  of   thanks,  reserving,  however,  by   484   votes against  107,   "   the   rights   of   the   estates  " - that   is   to   say,   the   right to   a   representation  of   the   people   promised  in   1815.   The   King answered  that,   in   convoking  the   Landtag,  he   had   acted  from  the fulness  of   his   kingly   power  and  had  even  gone   beyond  the promise  of   his   father;  that   he   therefore  refused  to   recognise  in the  Landtag  any  other  right   than  those  he   had  granted  to   it. He  declared  the  decree  of   1847   "   unassailable  in   its   main features."

The  "   United  Committees  "   of   the   Provincial  Estates,  summoned to   Berlin  for   consultation  regarding  the   Criminal  Code  in January,  1848,   were  still   sitting   when  the   King,   alarmed  by   the prevalent  agitation,  decided  to  give   way  on  the   question  of

## 442       THE  KINGDOM  OF  PRUSSIA   BEFORE    WILLIAM  I.

periodic  meetings  of   the   Landtag  (March  8,   1848).  This  tardy concession  did   not  arrest  the   popular  movement.

Revolution  of   1848. - The  revolution  in   Prussia  was  an   imitation of   the   revolution  in   France ; it   was  accomplished  by   a   rising in   the   capital.  At   Berlin  there  were  neither  political  parties   nor recognised  leaders,  nor  even  organization  by   secret  societies;  but there  was  a   discontented  multitude  of   young  men  and   labourers, mixed  with  foreigners,  particularly  Poles.  The  crowd  in   the city   had   perhaps   been   increased  by   the   scarcity   following  the   bad harvest  of   1847.   This  multitude,  already  stirred  up   against   the King,   the   nobles  and   the   public   officers,  and   inspired  by   a   vague democratic  feeling,  was  suddenly  aroused  by   the   news  of   the Paris  revolution  and   the   agitation  in   various  German  states.  In Prussia  herself,  in   the   manufacturing  towns  of   the   Rhine  and Silesia,  great   popular  assemblages  were  meeting  to   prepare  petitions to   the   King.   At   Berlin  improvised  gatherings  were  held in   the   cafes  when  the   newspapers  arrived  from  without.  On the   7th   of   March  a   meeting  held  in   the   Thiergarten  resolved  to present  a   petition   calling   for   a   meeting   of   the   Landtag.

Then  began  the  "   days   of   March."  This  was  a  conflict  between the   two   sets   of   men   holding   physical   force   in   Berlin,   the revolutionists  and  the  officers.  The  middle  class  held  aloof. The  officers  affected  to   despise   the   crowd;  they   spoke   of   the   trash. The  multitude  grew  angry,  irritated  by   the   military  measures  of precaution,  the   massing  of   troops  at   the   palace,   the   cannons,  the sentries,  the   cavalry  posted   at   the   city   gates.   There  were  collisions, and   several  were  wounded.  The  general  wrath  was directed  against  the  Prince  Royal,  later  Emperor  William  I., who  was  unpopular  as  the   leader  of   the   military  and   absolutist party.  At   the   news  of   the   Vienna  revolution,  a   mob  gathered  in front  of   his   palace   (March   15).   They   were   dispersed  by   the   military, but   without  violence.

The  King   was  beginning  to   yield   before  the   storm.  Like  the other  German  princes,  he   seems  to   have   had   an  exaggerated  view of   the   power  of   the   revolutionists.  On   the   I4th   of   March  he announced  a  meeting  of   the   Landtag  for   the   end   of   April,   "   to assist  in   the   measures  to   be   taken  for   the   welfare  of   the   German Fatherland."  He   promised  to   work  for   "   a   real   regeneration  of the   Confederation."  On   the  i8th,   having  received  deputations from  the   provinces  of   the   Rhine,  Prussia  and   Silesia,   he   advanced the   date   of   the   meeting   to   April   2 ;   at   the   same  time   he   expressed the   opinion  that   "   the   reorganization  of   the   federal  system  could

be   accomplished  only   by   agreement  of   the   princes  with  the   people "   and  that  this   "   necessitated  a   constitutional  organization  of all   the   German  states."  He   thus  sacrificed  his   favourite  doctrine.

The  proclamation  was  published  on  the   morning  of   March  18. During  the   day   crowds  gathered  before  the   palace   shouting  for the   King,   who  thanked  them  from  his   balcony.  But   instead  of dispersing,  they   remained  on  the   spot,   in   spite   of   the   summons of   the   officer  of   the   guards.  Then,   without  further  ado,   a   fight broke  out   between  the   mob  and   the   soldiers,  who   had   in   fact   been in   a   state  of   conflict  for   some  days.   Two  discharges  of   musketry, fired   at   random,  caused  the   crowd  to   run  away,  crying Treason!  Several  were  killed.  There  was  a  sally   of   the   troops stationed  at   the   palace,   a   volley   by   the   infantry,  and   a   charge   by the   dragoons.  The  mobs  then  pillaged  the   gun-shops,  workingmen  came  armed  with  crowbars;  there  was  a   battle  near  the palace;  barricades  were  put   up   in   the   streets  as   in   Paris.  This street  warfare  was  directed  by   journalists,  students,  and   revolutionists from   without.  The   contest  went  on  until   after   midnight.

The  army   had  little  by   little  pushed   back  the   rioters  and   was preparing  to  crush  them  on  the   following  day.   But   the   King suddenly  faltered  in   presence  of   civil  war.  On   the   morning  of the   1  9th   a   proclamation  "   to   my   dear   Berliners  "   appeared.  The King   adjured  his   Berliners,  in   the   name  of   the   sick   Queen,   not to   let   themselves  be   seduced  by   a   gang  of   malefactors  ; he   asked them  to   remove  the   barricades,  promising,  if   they   did   so,   to   remove the   troops.   The   insurgents  demanded  that   the   first   step should  be   the   retirement  of   the   troops.  On   the   advice  of   the loyal   citizens  the   King   yielded.  He   ordered  the   troops  to   be withdrawn  from  the  streets,  granted  the  citizens  permission  to arm  themselves  and  announced  a  change  of   ministers.  The   civic guard   became  masters  of   Berlin  and   of   the   government.  Prince William,  nicknamed  Prince  Mitraille,  was  ordered  by   the   King, his   brother,  to   leave  Berlin,  and  departed  for   England.  The King,   through  horror  of   bloodshed,  had  given   the   people   a   victory over   the   army.

Frederick  William,  abruptly  renouncing  his   pet   theories  and even  adopting  the   revolutionary  terminology,  assumed  the   part of   a   constitutional  king   at   the   head   of   a   national  movement.  On the   2 ist   of   March,   in   a   proclamation  "   to   the   Prussian  people   and the   German  nation,"  he   announced  himself  in   favour  of   a   "   true constitutional  system,  with  responsibility  of   the   ministers,  public trials  in   the   courts,   jury   in   criminal  cases,  equality   in   civil   and

political  rights."  Then,  robed  in   the  colours  of   the   Empire (the   black,   red,   and   gold   of   the   students),  he   went  through   Berlin on   horseback,  making  speeches  to   the   crowds.  In   the   evening he   exclaimed,  "   My   people   will   not   desert  me,  and   Germany,  confiding, will   unite   herself   to   me.   Prussia  henceforth  is   swallowed up   in   Germany."  At   one  stroke  the  King   accepted  all   the "revolutionary"  institutions  of   France:  a  written  constitution, a   single   national  assembly  elected  by   universal  suffrage;  he   got the   Landtag,  assembled  for   the   last  time,   to   indorse  this   program by   its   vote.*

The  National  Assembly. - The  Prussian  National  Assembly  of 402  members  was  chosen  by   indirect  election.  Each  Circle  was allowed  to   choose  a   delegate;  the   choice  was  made  by   a   body   of electors  who  were  themselves  chosen  by   the   voters - each  voting district  choosing-  one  elector  for   every  500   inhabitants.  To   be   a voter  it   was  sufficient  to   be   twenty-four  years  of   age   and   to   have resided  in   the   district  six   months.  The   Assembly  consisted  principally of   jurists,   professors,  and   parsons,  with  about  a   hundred peasants  and  artisans.  The  most  notable  men  in   it   had  been members  of   the   German  Vor-parlament.  Endowed,  not  with  the power  of   sovereign  decision  on  the   provisions  of   the   new  constitution, but   only   of   discussing   them   with   the   King,   the   Assembly found  itself  in   continual  conflict  with   the   old   governing  powers the   King,   the   military   men,  and   the   civil   officers.  It   lasted  only seven  months,  but   this   period   was   decisive  for   the   political   future of   Prussia.  Then  it   was  that   the   political  parties   of   the   kingdom took  form.

The  Left,   coming  chiefly   from  the   democratic  regions  of   the west  and   from  the   large   cities,   was  a   radical  democratic  party   resembling the   French  republicans.  It   sought,  French  fashion,  to establish  sovereignty  of   the   people;   it   proposed  that   the   Assembly should  declare  itself  sovereign,  and  should  vote  that  the   insurgents of   March  had  deserved  well  of   their  country.  It   demanded lay   control  of   the   schools  and   of   the   etat-civil;^  also  a  radical reform  of   the   administration.  It   came  to   an  understanding  with the   Left   of   the   Frankfort  Assembly  in   support  of   a   federal  government for   Germany  superior  to   the   state  governments.

*   In   the   province  of   Posen,  where  the   Polish  revolutionists  had  tried  a resort  to   force  in   1846,   there  was  a   Polish  insurrection  which  required  a real   war   for   its   suppression  (April-May).

f That  is,   the   registration  of   marriages,  births,  and  deaths,  with  the  attendant right   of   deciding  on   the   validity  of   marriages  and  on  questions  of legitimacy.

In   opposition  to   this   party   of   revolution  and   German  unity, there  was   formed  a   Conservative  Particularist  party,  made  up mainly  from  among  the   great   landowners  of   the   east.  This  party demanded  the   maintenance  of   the   privileges  of   the   aristocracy, the   power  of   the   Protestant  clergy,  and  the   independence  of Prussia.  It   got   the   name  of   the   Feudal  party   or,   from  the   name of   the   journal   it   had   just   founded,   the   Kreuzzeihmg  party.

Between  these  two  extremes,  the   centre  formed  a   party   of   conciliation, liberal,   royalist,   and   national  : it   wished  a   liberal  constitution for   Prussia  and   a   federal  union  of   Germany,  but   on  such terms  as   to   preserve  the   King's   sovereignty  and   the   independence of   the   Prussian  government.

The  Centre  held  control  in   the   national  assembly.  It   obtained the   rejection  of   the   propositions  made  by   the   Left   and   had   begun voting   a   constitution  prepared  by   a   committee  in   accordance with  its   own  views.  It   was  a   very   liberal  constitution,  patterned after  that   of   Belgium,  the   model  government  in   the   eyes  of   the liberals  of   the   Rhine  Province.  It   established  legal   equality  and all   the   Belgian  liberties - liberty   of   the   person,  of   residence, property,  religion,  education,  the   press,  meetings,  clubs,   petition. It   abolished  the   survivals  of   seignioral  authority - police, justice, and  dues.  The  government  was  to   be   organized  as   in   Belgium: two  elective  houses,  summoned  and  dissolved  by   the   King,   controlling the   finances  and  making  the   laws ;   the   King,   head  of   the executive  power,  swearing  fidelity  to   the   constitution  and  governing through   responsible  ministers;  the   judges   independent; local  administration  handed  over  to  elective  councils.  But  instead of   the   Belgian  property  qualification  for   voting,  universal suffrage  was  to   be   the   rule,   coupled  with  indirect  election  (t.   e., the   voters,  instead  of   voting   directly  for   their  representatives, were  to   choose  electors  to   act   for   them).  The  constitution  was to   be   agreed   to   by   the   King,   as   in   Belgium.

The  Prussian  national  assembly  had  no  more  power  than  the German  national  assembly  of   Frankfort  to   enforce  obedience  to its   decisions.  Its  deliberations  were  substantially  free;   the Burgher  guard  of   Berlin  defended  it   even  against  a   democratic outbreak  in   June.  But   the   King,   gradually  recovering  his   confidence, began   to   show   a   leaning  toward  the   Feudal  party;  and   he had   the   army  under  his   command.  In   the   cities  of   Prussia  there were  continual  quarrels  between  the  burgher  guard  and  the noble  army  officers,  who  were  accustomed  to  treat  civilians  as their  inferiors;  several  civilians  were  killed.  After  the   affair  of

Schwefdnitz  (July   31),   in   which  fourteen  persons  were  killed,   the Assembly  asked  for   a   decree  ordering  the   army  officers  to   avoid conflicts  with  the   citizens.  The   King   refused  the   request,  as  an infraction  of   his   authority  over  the   army.   The   Assembly,  by   219 votes  against  143,  repeated  its   request  in   more  emphatic  form (September  7).   This  brought  on  an  overt  breach.  The  King, who  had  appointed  two  liberal  ministries  in   succession,  one   in March  and   the   other  in   June,   now  dismissed  his   liberal  advisers and  formed  a   ministry  of   the   old   sort;   he   also   appointed,  as  military commander  of   the   province  of   Brandenburg,  General  von Wrangel,  an  advocate  of   repression  by   military  force.  Under this   threat  the   Assembly  gave  a   majority  to   the   Left;   it   refused  to insert  the   phrase   "   by   the   Grace  of   God   "   and   voted  an   invitation to   the   federal  government  to   defend  the   liberty   of   Vienna  (see p.   416).

The  people  of   Berlin  had  made  the  revolution  following French  example;  the   King   embraced  reaction  following  Austrian example.  When  the  Austrian  army   had  crushed  the   revolution in   Vienna,  Frederick  William  resolved  to   use  the   army  against the   Berlin  Assembly.  He   formed  a   "fighting  ministry  "   under his   uncle,   the   Duke  of   Brandenburg,  and   ordered  the   Assembly to   move  to   the   small  town  of   Brandenburg.  The  Assembly  refused, and   went   on   with   its   sessions  at   Berlin.  Then   the   army  entered the   city,   took   possession  of   the   hall   in   which  the   Assembly sat,   and   disarmed  the   burgher  guard.  Berlin  was  proclaimed  in a   state  of   siege ;   all   gatherings  of   more  than   twenty  persons  were forbidden  (November  10-12).  The  Assembly  protested  and  even voted  a   refusal  of   the   taxes.  But   between  the   Assembly  and   the army  the   contest  was  too  unequal;  the   Assembly  was  broken  up. The  King,   having   failed  to   win   over  a   majority  of   the   deputies to   support  Brandenburg,  declared  the   Assembly  dissolved  (December 5).   At   the   same  time,   invoking  the   traditional  sovereignty of   the   Prussian  King   he   proclaimed  a   constitution  on   his own  authority - adding,  however,  that  it   would  be   subject   to   revision by   legislative  process.  He   also  announced  a   meeting  of the   Chambers  created  by   the   instrument,  to   be   held   in   Berlin.

The  constitution  of   the   6th   of   December  reproduced  pretty closely   the   work   of   the   National  Assembly;  but   it   was   "   granted   " by   the   King,   without  the   advice  and   consent  of   the   nation's  representatives; and   one   Article  gave   the   King   the   right,   in   the   absence of   the   two   houses,  to   issue  ordinances  having   the   force  of law.  This  was  taken  from  that  article  of   the   French  Charte

which  had   brought  the   revolution  of   1830.   It   was  put   to   immediate use   in   promulgating  a   law  to   regulate  the   elections  to   the Chambers,  and  even  in   effecting  some  liberal  reforms - introduction of   jury   trial,   abolition  of   special   jurisdictions,  and   redemption of   seignioral  dues.

The  King,   by   retaining  command  of   the   army,   had   resumed  his sovereign  power  as  soon  as   he   wished,  but   he   did   not   dare  any more  to  violate  constitutional  forms  "   desired  by   his   people  '   ; and   he   himself  introduced  once  for   all   into   Prussia  all   the   revolutionary institutions  condemned  by   his   own  ideal - a  written constitution,  popular  representation,  and   even  universal  suffrage.

The  Constitution  of   1850. - The   two   Chambers,  called  together for   the   revision  of   the   new  constitution,  had   not  time  to   finish their  work.  They   got   into   conflict  with  the   King,   at   first   on   the question  of   German  unity,   later  on   home  questions.  They   entreated him   to   accept   the   imperial   crown  offered  to   him   by   the Frankfort  Assembly,  expressing  at   the   same  time  the   opinion  that the   constitution  adopted  by   that   assembly  was  valid  and   binding (see   p.   395).   Later  they   asked  that   the   "   state  of   siege   "   decreed for   Berlin  be   withdrawn.  On   the   27th   of   April   the   King   dissolved the   popular  chamber.  In   order  to   get   a   more  docile  Parliament he   enacted,  by   way   of   ordinance,  a   new  election  law   much less   democratic  than  the   one  under  which  the   dissolved  Chamber was  elected.

1.   Universal  suffrage  was  retained  in   the   first  stage   of   the elections,  but   it   was  made  unequal.     In   each   voting   precinct   the primary  voters  were  divided  into  three  classes  on  the   basis  of direct  taxation,  by   first   arranging  them  in   a   descending  scale,   the heaviest  taxpayers  at   the   head,   the   less   heavy   next,  and   so  on down  to   those  who  pay   the   least  or  no   tax  at   all ; the   list   is   then cut   into   three   parts   at   such   points   as   to   have   each   part   represent one-third  of   the   whole  direct  taxation  of   the   precinct.     The   taxpayers named  in   each   part   constitute  a  class,   and   each  class chooses  the   same  number  of   electors.     The   heavy   taxpayers  who constitute  the   first   class,   being   few   in   number,  are   individually much  more  strongly  represented  than  the  crowd  of   poor  men who  constitute  the   third  class.     This  "   three-class  system/'  established provisionally  by   royal   decree,   still   subsists  in   Prussia.

2.   The   voting   at   eadh   of   the   two  stages   is   viva   voce,  and   each man's  vote  is   a  matter  of   public   record.     The   reason  given   by the   law   is   that   "   nothing  is   so   indispensable  to   a   free   people   as tne  courage  to   express  one's  conviction  publicly."

## 448        THE  KINGDOM  OF  PRUSSIA   BEFORE    WILLIAM  7.

The  Chamber,  elected  in   1850   under  this   law,   at   a   time   of   general reaction,   included  about  200  office-holders  in   a   total  of   350 members.  It   had  no  will  to  oppose  the  government.  It   accepted the   constitution,  with  such  modifications  as   the   King   was pleased  to   make  in   it:   the   election  law   of   the   three  classes,  the re-establishment  of   the   stamp  tax  on  newspapers,  together  with the   "   deposit  "   of   money  as  a  security  for   good   conduct,  the abolition  of   the   requirement  that  soldiers  should  swear  to   support the   constitution,  the   establishment  of   a   special   court  for   the trial   of   political   offences;  and   even   Article  109,   under  which  existing taxes  continue  to   be   collected  until  changed  by   law,   a   provision which   reduces  the   power  of   the   Chamber  to   the   mere  voting of   new  taxes.  Regarding  the   composition  of   the   upper house,  no  agreement  was  found  possible;  the   Chamber  wished  to preserve  some  form  of   election,  whereas  the   King   held  out  for appointment.  It   was  decided  to   postpone  the   settlement  of   this question  till   1852.

The  King  then  consented  to  promulgate  the  constitution (January  31,   1850).  Later  he   swore  to   maintain  it,   but   in   doing so  explained  that  he   gave   it   his   sanction  only   because  it   had been  improved:  "   It   is   a   condition  of   life   that. government  be   left possible  for   me,   for   in   Prussia  the   King   must  rule,   and   I   rule   .   .   . because  it   is   God's  command."  Thus  did   he   come  back  to   the doctrine  of   divine  right   and   the   sovereign  power  of   the   King. And  yet   the   Constitution  of   1850,   by   consecrating  the   "   rights of   Prussians  "   to   liberty   and   equality,  established  a   system  in form  democratic  and   liberal - more  democratic  than  even  that  of Belgium.  It   brought  Prussia  into  the   political  life   of   our  time.

The   Reaction  (1850-59). - The  reaction  against  the   revolution of   1848   did   not   lead,   in   Prussia,   to   a   restoration  of   the   old   system. Frederick  William  refused  to   imitate  the  coups   d'etat  of   the Austrian  government  and  Napoleon  III.  He  allowed  himself to   propose  a   plan   for   reducing  the   constitution  to   a   charte  and   for restoring  election  by   "   estates  ";   but   he   did   not   dare   to   break  his oath,   and   he   preserved  the   constitution.

The  contradiction  between  the  absolutist  traditions  of   the Prussian  government  and   the   new  Constitution  was  surmounted in   practice  by   devices  which  recall  those  of   Napoleon  III.  (see p.   173).   The   lower  house  remained  a  representative  assembly, but   it   was  made  dependent  on  the   government.  The  administration, as   in   France,  arranged  the   electoral  districts  to   suit   itself. It   recommended  to  the  voters  candidates  agreeable  to  the

King,  - often  office-holders, - and   always   secured  the   election  of a   large   ministerial  majority.  The  chamber  of   1855   was  nicknamed the   "House  of   Landrathe";  it   had   72   of   them.  (The Landrath  answers  roughly  to   the   French  subprefect.)

It   was   hardly   necessary  to   take  trouble  to   get   so   docile  a representative  body.  The  usage  was  established  of   not  presenting the   budget   to   the   Parliament  until   after   the   money   had   been expended.  The  chamber  voted  it   en   bloc   without  debating  the details;  it   simply   ratified  what   had   already   been   done.

The  lower  house,  besides,  had  only   half  of   the   legislative power;  the  upper   house  was  able  to   hold  it   in   check.  Now the  King   was  no   longer   willing  to   have  the   elective  upper house  of   the   Belgian  type,  originally  contemplated  by   the constitution.  He  held  out  for  an  aristocratic  chamber,  as in   other  great  monarchies.  He  prevailed  on  the  Chambers to  give   him  the  power  of   determining  the  composition  of the  body   by   royal   ordinance  (1853).  The  final  ordinance, in   1854,   created  a   House  of   Lords  (Herrenhaus)  consisting partly  of   hereditary  and  partly   of   life   members,  the   whole in   three  categories:  (i)   The  royal   princes;  (2)   The  hereditary nobles  who  formed  the  curia  of   seigneurs  in   the   Landtag  of 1847;   (3)   Life   members  appointed  by   the   King   at   his   own  pleasure or   on   the   nomination  of   the   noble   families,   great   landowners, universities,  and  cities.  The  number  of   members  was  not limited;  it   has   varied  from  200  to   400,   but   the   nobles  have   always been  in   majority  and   have  supported  the   King   in   opposition  to the   elected  lower  house.

This  profound  transformation  of   the   constitution,  contrary  to the   very   terms  of   the   original   and   made  by   mere  ordinance,  was never  ratified  by   a   regular   law ;   so  several  commentators  on   Prussian constitutional  law   regard   the   Herrenhaus  as  unconstitutional. It   has  nevertheless  remained  a  part   of   the   legislature, equal   in   power  with  the   elected  house.  The  Prussian  Parliament was  given   no  collective  name  in   the   Constitution  of   1850. The  King   proposed  the   old   historical  name  of   Landtag.  This proposal  the   lower  house  rejected  (1855);   but   the   King   would not  have  the  French  name  of   "   Chambers."  The  ministry adopted,  for   daily   practice,  the   name  of   Landtag,  which  has   become the   established  designation. 29

The  press,  which  the  constitution  declared  to   be   free,   was stifled  with  prosecutions  and   threats.  A   member  of   the   Landtag was  prosecuted  for   inciting   the   people   against   the   Junkers

## 45°       THE  KINGDOM  OF  PRUSSIA   BEFORE    WILLIAM  I.

(squires).  The  Voter's  Journal  was  confiscated  as  often  as   three days   in   a   week.

The  right   of   holding  political  meetings  was  suspended;  even the   religious  meetings  of   dissenting  Protestants  were  forbidden. Political  clubs  were  dissolved;  the   government  prevented  the holding  of   gatherings  in   the   beer-gardens  by   withdrawing  the license  of   any   beer-seller  who  allowed  his   premises  to   be   used for   such  purposes.  Certain  democrats,  accused  of   conspiracy, were  kept   in   prison   eight   months  without  trial.

This  system  rested  on  an  alliance  between  the   court,  the   great landowners,  the   military  men,  and  the   Orthodox  party.  The King,   the   ministers,  and   the   Kreuzzeitung,  the   official  organ  of the   Court,   declared  it   was  necessary  to   re-establish  the   autocratic power  of   the   Crown,  the   influence  of   the   aristocracy,  and   the reign  of   religion.  The  King,  in   receiving  a   deputation  in Silesia,   reproached  the   inhabitants  with   "   following  the   example of   the   large   cities,"   and   he   threatened  them  with   his   displeasure if   agitations  were  begun   again.   "   There  is   in   the   cities  an  evil spirit,"   said   he.   At   Elbing,   in   1853,   he   censured  "   those  municipal authorities  who,   following  demoralizing  and   de-Christianizing tendencies,  still   worship  the   unclean  and  corrupting  conquests of   a   shameful  epoch."  Stahl,   rector  of   the   University  of Berlin,  in   a   famous  toast,   declared:  "Science  must  face  about." He   reproached  it   with  having   been  "   in   conflict  with   the   facts   of life   and   especially  with   its   controlling  forces." ing

The  nobles  obtained  a  modification  of   the   constitution  as  regards the   abolition  of   their   privileges.  The   institution  of   fide commissa  was  restored  in   1852,   which  enabled  them  to   keep   up the   entail  of   their   lands;   and   in   1856   landowners  were  given   the police   jurisdiction  of   their   domains.  Above  all,   the   remodelling of   the   administrative  arrangements  of   the   provinces,  Circles,  and communes  was  arrested;  the  laws  already  passed,  which  had made  a   beginning  of   the   work,   were  repealed.  The  provincial estates,  the   old   assemblies  of   the   Circles,  and   the   administration of   the   communes  by   the   nobles,   as   before  1850,   were  all   restored.

Prussia  found  herself  again   under  the   administration  of   royal officers  and   the   landholding  nobility,  and   under  the   personal  government of   the   King   and   ministers - disguised  by   a   democratic representative  system,  as   in   France  at   the   same  period.

This  system  lasted  until  Frederick  William  IV.,   so   far   touched in   his   mind   as   to   have   become  incapable  of   business,  handed  over the   government  to   his   brother,  first   as   Lieutenant  (October,

1858)   and   later   as   Regent.  William  swore  to   maintain  the   constitution and   chose   ministers  favourable  to   reform;  but   he   took pains   to   announce  publicly  that   no  change  of   system  was  to   be looked  for:   "what  has   been  promised  shall  be   performed,  what has   not   been   promised  shall  be   withheld."

Prussia's  German  Policy. - Throughout  this   whole  period,   since 1814,   Prussia  had   laboured  to   extend  her   influence  over  the   rest of   Germany.  Like  Austria,  she   was  at   once  a   great   Europ&amp;an power  and  a  member  of   the   German  Federation  for   a  part   of her   territory.  But   Austria  had   only   a   small  minority  of   German subjects  (8,000,000  in   36,000,000)  and  her  German  districts touched  the   rest  of   Germany  only   at   one  corner - the   southwest. Prussia,  on  the   other  hand,   peopled  almost  exclusively  by   Germans, was   composed  of   provinces  which  spread   across  the   whole Federation,  bordering  on   twenty-eight  other  states  and   intimately connected  with  the   economic  life   of   all   parts   of   Germany.  Being thus   so   much   more   German  than   Austria,  she   was   in   a   position to   lay   the   foundation  for   eventual  leadership  of   the   union. To   this   end   she   employed  three  sets  of   agencies  - military,   political, and   commercial.

She   had   the   best   army   in   Germany,  the   defence  of   half   of   the western  frontier,  supposed  to   be   threatened  by   France;  she   also had   garrisons  in   certain  federal  fortresses.  As   early   as  1815   she had  asked  that  the  Diet  should  grant   her   the   command-inchief  of   the   troops   of   the   other  North  German  states,   Austria  to have  the   command  of   those  of   South  Germany.  But   except   during the   critical  years  when  fear   of   a   French  invasion  gave Prussia  a  passing  influence  over  the   threatened  states  (1830, 1840,   1848),   the   other  governments  steadily  opposed  a   measure which  would  have  given   Prussia  military  control.  So   the   federal army  remained  decentralized.

As  to  political  leadership,  the   King   of   Prussia  left   that   to Austria  till   1848;   and   when  the   revolutionary  Assembly  of   Frankfort tendered  it   to   Frederick  William  IV.,   under  the   title   of   Emperor, he   refused  it,   because  it   had   not   been  offered  "by   his equals   "   (see   p.   395).   Now  the   princes   of   Germany,  especially those  of   them  who  bore  the   title   of   King,   would  not  willingly place   themselves  under  the   King   of   Prussia,  whom  they   accused of   wishing  to   aggrandize  himself  at   their  expense.  They   preferred to   support  the   Emperor,  their  traditional  superior,  who had   no  eye   to   annexations  nor  to   a   closer  union  of   Germany.

The   Zollverein. - It   was  neither  through  military  nor  political

measures,  but  through  commerce,  that  the  unity   of   Germany under  Prussian  leadership  began.  The  first  form  of   unity   was the  Zollverein  or   Customs  Union,  instituted  and  directed  by Prussia.  It   was  formed  slowly,  in   the   face   of   resistance  which, general  at   first,   became  gradually  weaker  as   the   various  states perceived  the   material  advantages  it   offered.  It   was  begun   in 1818,   but   was  not  completed  until  1853.

It   originated  in   the   extremely  depressed  economic  condition of   Prussia  after  1815,   which  made  a  radical  reform  of   her   tariff necessary.  The  several  parts  of   the   kingdom  had  never  before been  under  one  and  the   same  tariff;   each  district  had   a  customs system  of   its   own;   in   fact,   Prussia  had   67   different  tariff  areas. Her  territory,  cut   into   two  widely   separated  divisions,  made  up of   fragments  interspersed  with  lands  belonging  to   other  states, would  have  been  hard  to   encircle  with  custom  houses;  the   complicated nature  as   well   as   the   length   of   the   frontiers  (over   4000 miles)  would  have  made  smuggling  easy.

Maassen,  the   officer  charged  with  arranging  the   customs  affairs, succeeded  in   setting   up   a  common  tariff  and  a  single administration  for   the   whole  kingdom  (1818).  Foreseeing  the impossibility  of   preventing  smuggling  by   direct  means,  he   chose the   plan   of   making  it   unprofitable,  by   setting   a   low   scale  of duties:  ten  per   cent,  on  manufactured  products  which  might   be imported  at   all   points   on   the   frontiers;  twenty  per   cent,  on  colonial or   over-sea  products,  which  could  only   be   brought  in through  ports  easily   guarded.  In   order  to   avoid  disputes  as   to the   valuation  of   goods,   as  well   as   the   temptation  to   show  false invoices,  fie   adopted  specific  duties  as   far   as  possible,  instead  of the   ad   valorem  method.  Prussia  was  thus  constrained,  by   her defective  frontiers,  to   adopt   the   most  liberal  commercial  policy of   all   Europe.  No   other  great  state,  at   that   time  of   trade  restrictions, had   a   tariff   so   nearly   approaching  free   trade.

In   establishing  her   line   of   custom  houses,  Prussia  was   led   to include  within  it   the   inclosed  territories  belonging  to   the   petty princes   of   Thuringia.  She   offered  these  piinces   to   share  the   revenue collected  on   the   basis   of   population;  at   first   they   protested against  the   tyranny  of   Prussia,  and   brought  the   matter  before the   Federal  Diet;   but   in   the   end   they   accepted  the   arrangement. The  first   treaty,  with   Schwarzburg-Sonderhausen  (1819),   served as  a   model  for   the   treaties  with   the   other  states  whose  territory was   inclosed  within  Prussia.  The   inclosed  state  entered  for   good and  all   into   the   Prussian  customs  system,  accepting  the   Prus-

sian  tariff   and   the   collection  by   Prussian  officers,  and   receiving of   the   proceeds  a   share  proportioned  to   its   share  of   the   total population  contributing  to   the   revenue.  For  the   smaller  state the   arrangement  was  financially  advantageous.

The  Prussian  government  sought  to   negotiate  treaties  with  the southern  and   central  states,   but   for   some  time  the   princes   rejected every  proposition  of   Prussia  as  an  attack  on   their  independence. They   preferred  to   make  local  customs  unions  among  themselves. From  1820  to  1828  there  were  negotiations  between  the   central states,   between  the   Rhenish  states,  and   between  Bavaria  and Wurtemburg.  Austria,  which  clung   to   her   prohibitive  system, would  neither  admit  the   German  states  to   a   customs  union  with herself  nor  consent  to   their  entering  a   union  with   Prussia.

Finally,  after  some  years  of   intrigue,  Prussia,  having  failed to   win   over   her   nearest  neighbours,  made  a   treaty   directly   with Hesse-Darmstadt,  which,  with  its   divided  territory,  found  itself isolated  in   the   west.  The  agreement,  in   this  case,  was  a   bad financial  operation  for   Prussia.  Hesse-Darmstadt,  for   a   territory of   only   3000  square  miles,  brought  her   a  customs  frontier  of 500   miles.  But  the   government  accepted  it   from  motives  of policy,   to   create  a   precedent.  The  treaty  of   1828  with  HesseDarmstadt  became,  in   fact,   a   pattern   for   the   later   customs  treaties with  the   other  German  states.  In   order  to  soothe  the   sovereignty of   the   smaller  states,  these  treaties  were  given   the   form of   a   customs  union  (Zollverein),  the   two  contracting  parties   standing on   a   footing  of   equality  in   each  case.  The  two  states  were to   abolish  all   customs  duties  in   their  trade  with   each  other,   and to   have  a  common  tariff  in   their  trade  with  foreign  countries. Each  was  to   administer  this  common  tariff  on   its   own  part   of the   common  frontier,  each  was  to   send  an  agent  to   watch  the customs  administration  of   the   other.  But   Prussia,  in   every  case, prevailed  on   the   other  to   adopt   the   Prussian  tariff   and   her   excise taxes  on   tobacco,  also   her   commercial  treaties  with   foreign   countries; in   a  word,  Prussia  controlled  the   customs  union.  The treaties  were  made  for   six   years  only,   at   the   end   of   which  term each  state  regained  liberty   of   action.

In   competition  with  the   Prussian  union  in   the   north  a   southern customs  league  was  formed  by   Bavaria  and  Wurtemburg;  also a   commercial  union  of   central  Germany  (1828).  But   the   southern and   northern  leagues,  threatened  with  separation  by   the   establishment of   a   barrier  between,  took  measures  against  their common  enemy,  the  central  union,  and  succeeded  in   detaching

## 454       THE  KINGDOM  OF  PRUSSIA   BEFORE    WILLIAM  I.

from  it   two   little  states,  with   the   result  of   opening  a   passage through  the   line  that  threatened  to   separate  them.  Thereupon the   Central  Union  broke  up ;   Hesse-Cassel  joined   the   Zollverein (1831),   the   southern  states  followed,  and   finally   most  of   the   other states.  By   1836   the   greater  part   of   Germany  had   joined   the Prussian  Zollverein.  The  method  was  by   separate  treaties,  for a   term  of   years,   between  Prussia  and   each  of   the   states.  The Zollverein  included  25,000,000  of   people,  and   its   frontier  was   less extended  than  that  of   Prussia  in   the   days   when  she   stood  alone. The  only   states  remaining  outside  were  Mecklenburg,  the   four Free  Cities,  and  the   states  of   the   northwest  (Hanover,  Brunswick, Oldenburg),  which  formed  a   separate  union  with  a   lower tariff   than   the   Zollverein.

The  Zollverein  brought  so  manifest  benefits  that,   in   spite   of the   dislike  of   the   other  governments  for   Prussia,  the   treaties,  at their  expiration,  were  renewed  for   twelve  years - to   run  till   1853. In   1850,   after  the   unsuccessful  attempt  of   Prussia  to   form  a new  political  union,   the   German  princes   made  preparations  to   go out  of   the   Zollverein,  in   order  to   form  a  customs  union  with Austria  on  the   basis  of   a   higher   tariff:  they   found  the   Prussian tariff  not  sufficiently  protectionist.  Prussia  was  not  willing to   follow  them  in   joining   Austria;  she   turned  to   the   states  of   the northwest,  which  had  stood  aloof  from  the   Zollverein  because they   regarded  its   scale  of   duties  as   too   high   for   their  trade  with England.  With  these  she  formed  a  customs  union,  consenting to   lower  her   tariff  for   the   purpose.  The   old   Zollverein  seemed to   be   broken  up   (1852).  But   the   former  members  of   it   failed, after   all,   in   their   negotiations  with   Austria,  and   in   the   year   1853 revived  their   treaties  with  Prussia  for   another  twelve  years.

The  Zollverein,  by   a  series  of   special   temporary  treaties,  had almost  realized  the   commercial  union  which  the   Diet  had  failed to   establish.  All   the   German  states,  except   Austria,  were  now members  of   it.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.- Dahlmann-Waitz,  "   Quellenkunde  der  Deutschen Gesch.,"  1894   ed.  (On   this  work  and  the   character  given   to   the   bibl.  of this   chapter,  see  note  to   bibl.  to   chap,   xii.)

DOCUMENTS.- The  principal  official  documents  are  the   Reports  of   the assemblies  of   1848   (see   Waitz,  1894   edit.,   Nos.  6081-82,)  and  the  Gesetzsammlung  (official  collection  of   Prussian  laws).

Of   the   letters  and  recollections,  the   most  instructive  are  :   Hardenberg, 5   vols.,   1877.- Friedrich  Wilhelm  IV.,   1873,   correspondence  with  his   friend

Bunsen.  (Extracts  in   S.-R.  Taillandier,  "   Dix  Ans  de   1'Hist.  d'Allemagne," J875.)  - Th.   von   Bernhardi,  vol.   i.,   ii.,   1893.

WORKS.- The  chief  complete  history  is   Treitschke,  "   Deutsche  Gesch.," 5   vols.,   1886-95,  stops   at   1848   (see   bibl.   to   chap,   xii.) ; it   tells  the   secret history  of   the   government  from  documents  in   the   Prussian  archives  ;   very Prussian,  and  very  partial  to   Frederick  William  III.- Summary  in   Bulle, see  chap,  xii.- Excellent  articles  in   the  "   Allgemeine  Deutsche  Bio- graphic." In   French  :   Veron,   "   Hist,   de   la   Prusse,"  popular  edit.

ON  REFORMS  FROM  1807  TO  1814   :   See  the  monographs  on  reformers  : Pertz,  "   Leben  des  .  .  .   Fr.   von   Stein,"  6   vols.,   1849-55,  exaggerates  the role  of   his   hero.- Seeley,   "   Life   and   Times  of   Stein,"  3   vols.,   1880.- (Summaries in   Cavaignac,  "   Formation  de   la   Prusse  Contemp.,"  1891). - Lehmann, "   Scharnhorst,"  2   vols.,   1886-87.- Oncken,  "   Zeitalter  der   Revolution,"  vol. ii.,   1887   (Oncken  coll.).

ON  THE  HISTORY  OF   INSTITUTIONS  :   VonRonne,  "   Staatsrecht  der   Preussischen  Monarchic,"  4   vols.,  ist  edit.,   1856-63,  4th   ed.,   1881;   description both  juridical  and   historical  of   all   Prussian  institutions,  the   most  complete work  of   this   nature  ; the   first   edition  is   preferable,  as   it   describes  the   system previous   to   the   transformations  of   1867.-  Bornhak,  "   Gesch.  des   Preussischen  Verwaltungsrechts,"  4  vols.,  1884-92.- Grant  Duff,  "   Studies  in European  Politics,"  has  excellent  chapters  on   German  affairs  under  the Confederation.- Malet,  "   Overthrow  of   the   Germanic  Confederation."

ON  SOCIAL  AND  POLITICAL  LIFE:  v.   Bulow-Cummerow,  "   Preussen,  seine Verfassung  .   .   .,"   2  vols.,  1842-43,  aristocratic. - F.Fischer,  "Preussen am  Abschlusse  der  Ersten  Halfte  des  XlXten  Jahrhunderts,"  1876,  liberal.-K.   Hillebrand,  "   La   Prusse  Contemp.  et   ses   Institutions,"  1867.

ON  THE  PEASANT  EMANCIPATION:  J.-F.  Knapp,  "   Die  Bauernbefreiung  .   .   , Preussens,"  2  vols.,  1887,  an  accurate  study  of   the   *   condition  of   the peasants.

ON  THE  ZOLLVEREIN:  W.Weber,  "   Der  Deutsche  Zollverein,"  1869.Bibl.  in  "   Handworterbuch  der  Staatswissenschaften."- In  English, Bowring's  "Report  on  the  Russian  Commercial  Union,"  Eng.   Parl.  Doc., 1840. - Band's  "   Selections  in   Economic  History,"  1888.

## CHAPTER   XV.

## ESTABLISHMENT   OF   GERMAN   UNITY.

GERMANY,  kept   in   the   'helpless  condition  of   the   Federation  by the   rivalry   between  Prussia  and   Austria,  has   become  a   nation  by the   victory  of   Prussia.  The  creation  of   the   new  Empire  was made  possible  by   a   series  of   struggles  and   transformations.  But during  this   period   of   preparation  (1859-71)  the   history   of   Prussia is   so  closely   interwoven  with  that   of   the   other  German  states that   it   will   be   advantageous  to   make  one  narrative  of   the   whole.

Reform  of   the   Prussian  Army   (1859-62). - The   Prince  Royal   of Prussia,  regent  since  1858,   became,  in   January,  1861,   at   the   age of   sixty-three,  King   William  I.   Very   unpopular  with  the   Prussian liberals   as   head   of   the   Prussian  military   party,   he   had   always taken  a  great   interest  in   the   army.   From  the   moment  that   he became  master  of   the   government,  he   set   himself  to   reorganize the   Prussian  military   system.

The  law   of   1814   had   established  in   principle   the   universal  threeyear  service  in   the   active  army;   but   although  the   population  had increased  meanwhile  from  12,000,000  to  18,000,000,  the   size  of the   army   had   hardly   been  changed.  The  number  of   possible recruits  had   risen  from  about  40,000  a   year   to   about  63,000 ; but as   the   number  of   actual  soldiers  for   whom  pay   and   outfit  were provided  was  only   about  130,000,  the   practice  was  to   enlist  only a   part   of   the   young  men  each  year,  and   to   turn  most  of   them over  to   the   reserve  after  two  years  of   active  service.  That  is to   say,   the   two  principles  of   universal  military  drill,   and   service for   three   years  with   the   colours,  had   been   abandoned  in   practice. As   service  in   the   reserve  was   for   two  years  only,   this   body   was insufficient,  if   called  out,   to   raise  the   whole  army   to   its   warfooting  of   400,000  men.  To   complete  it,   men  of   the   Landivehr, that   is   to   say,   fathers  of   families,  would  have   to   be   called  out. Now  the   Landwehr  was  not  up   to  the   standard  of   the   active army,  and   a   call   upon   it   for   service  would  impose   heavy   sacrifices on  the   people.

King   William  accomplished  two  reforms:  I.   He   re-established the   universal  service,  and   for   the   three  full   years.   This  raised

456

the   active  army  to   nearly   200,000  men.  2.   He   lengthened  the period   of   service  in   the   reserve  from  two  to   four   years.   On   the other  hand  he   provided  that   the   men  should  retire  from  the   Landzvehr  at   the   age   of   thirty-two,  instead  of   forty,   the   previous  rule. The  three  years'   service  in   the   active  army  and   the   four  years in   the   reserve,  covering  for   the   young  men  the   years   from  twenty to   twenty-seven,  sufficed  to   yield   an  army  of   440,000  men  without calling   on   the   Landwehr.  The   change   gave  an  army  consisting of   men  at   once  younger  and  better  drilled  than  the   old practice.  But   for   these  reforms  more  officers  and   more  money were  necessary.

The  King   took  advantage  of   the   mobilization  of   the   Prussian army   during   the   Italian  war  of   1859;   of   the   Landwehr  battalions called  out  at   that   juncture,  he   retained  the   officers  in   service  after the   men  in   the   ranks  were  dismissed.  But   the   money  necessary for   paying   these  officers  had   only   been   voted  for   one  year.   The King   proposed  to   the   Landtag  a   bill   for   reorganizing  the   army and  at   the   same  time  asked  for   an   increase  of   the   land-tax  to cover  the   expense.  The  Lower  House  disliked  the  proposed lengthening  of   military  service  from  two  years  to  three;  the Upper  House  disliked  the   land-tax.  The  government  had   to   be satisfied  with  a  compromise:  the   two  houses  renewed  for   one year   the   vote  of   money  to   maintain  provisionally  and   complete the   measures  necessary  to  the   existing  war-footing  and   to   the enlarged  army   (May,   1860).

In   spite   of   the   word  "   provisionally,"  inserted  as  an  amendment by   the   Lower  House,  the   government  acted  on  the   assumption that   the   reorganization  of   the   army  was  a   settled  fact. It   transformed  provisional  battalions  into  regular   regiments  with numbers  and  colours.  The  Chamber  continued  to   vote  the   additional money   with   the   declaration  that   it   was  merely   provisional.

The  Prussian  House  of   Representatives  had   not  the   same  practical power   as   the   representative  bodies  in   other  parliamentary states  of   western  Europe.  Recently  created  by   a   revolutionary movement,  it   had   been  reduced  by   the   absolutist  reaction  to   the position  of   a   mere  consulting  and   registering  body.   Its   constitutional right   of   passing   laws  and   voting   taxes  was  confined  to rejecting  bills  and   new  taxes  proposed  by   the   government.  It had  no  means  of   putting  effective  pressure  on  the   ministers  and their  subordinates,  who  remained  the   real   holders  of   power.

King   William,  at   his   accession,  had   accepted  the   constitution, but   he   interpreted  it   as  a   rule   of   procedure  for   the   conduct  of

public   affairs,   not   as   a   contract  between  the   King   and   the   people. He  still   held  the   King   to   be   invested  with  a   higher   power  of divine  origin,   which  gave   him  the   right   and   the   duty   of   directing the   government,  and   in   particular  the   army  and   the   foreign policy.  It   was  in   substance  the   Tory   doctrine  of   the   Divine Right,  re-enforced  by   the   Hohenzollern  tradition  which  made the   King   the   hereditary  head  of   the   army   (Kriegsherr).

Nevertheless  Regent  William's  course  had  reassured  the   liberals. He   had   discarded  the   feudal  party   who   had   surrounded his   brother  and   had   taken  his   ministers  from  among  the   supporters of   the   constitution.  The  reaction  of   1850   had   exhausted itself,   and   the   constitution  was  safely   established.  A   "   new  era   " was  beginning.  It   showed  itself  in   the   elections  of   1858,   which returned  a  strong  majority  of   constitutional  liberals.  This  majority tried   to   act   in   harmony   with   the   ministers  of   the   new  era, who,  on  their  part,   brought  forward  a   liberal  reform - a  permissive civil   marriage   bill   (the   Herrenhaus  rejected   it).   The Lower  House  avoided  a  renewal  of   the   conflict  regarding  the army  question  by   voting   the   additional  supplies;  but   in   1861   this was  done  by   a   majority  of   eleven  only,   and   with   a   reduction  in the   amount  proposed  by   the   ministry.

William,  on   becoming  King   in   1861,   delivered  some  utterances which  showed  the   growing  breach  between  him  and  the   liberals. The  proclamation  "   to   my   people   "   reproduced,  with  commendation, the   saying   of   his   predecessor  in   1847:   "   As   for   me  and   my House,  we  will  serve  the   Lord."  At   the   public   coronation  in Koenigsberg  he   convoked  the   two  Houses  of   the   Landtag,  and took  pains   to   explain  to   them  his   doctrine  of   the   divine  right: "   The   Kings   of   Prussia  receive  their  crown  from  God.  I   shall therefore  take  my  crown  to-morrow  from  the   Lord's  table  and place   it   on  my   head."  He   did   in   fact   take  it   from  the   communion table,   and   made   the   further  declaration  : "   I   am  the   first King   to   mount  the   throne  since  it   was  surrounded  with  modern institutions;  but   not   forgetting  that   the   crown  comes  only   from God,   I   have   shown  .   .   .   that   I   have   received  it   from   his   hands  " (October,  1861)!

Formation  of   the   Progress  Party  (1861-62). - Between  William I.,   King   by   divine  right,   and  the   liberal  majority  in   the House  of   Representatives,  a  conflict  began   which  lasted,  in   the acute  form,   for   four   years.   For   the   elections  of   1861   a   new   German-Progress party   was   formed.  In   its   electoral  address  it   declared itself   squarely   opposed   to   the   ministers  both   in   their   do-

mestic  policy   and   in   their   German  policy.  In   home  affairs  the party   demanded  the   completion  of   the   "   Constitutional  State  "   by establishing  the   responsibility  of   public   officers - that  is   to   say, the   right   of   prosecuting  them  before  the   courts.  (This   was  at that   time  one  of   the   favourite  demands  of   all   the   liberal  parties on  the   Continent;  a   law   on  ministerial  responsibility  was  mentioned in   the   Prussian  Constitution,  but   had  not  yet   been  enacted.) They   also   demanded  a   reform  of   local  and   provincial administration  abolishing  the   privileges  of   the   great   landowners  ; a   reform  of   the   public   schools  making   them  independent  of   the clergy;  civil  marriage;  right   of   jury   trial  in   press  cases;  two years'   service  in   the   army,  so  as   to   reduce  the   cost  to   the   nation. And  above  all,   in   order  to   make  the   other  reforms  possible,  they demanded  a   "   radical  reform  of   the   House  of   Lords,  the   enemy of   all   progress."  In   German  affairs  the   party   demanded  a   close union  of   Germany,  with  a  strong  central  power   in   the   hands  of Prussia,  and   a   representation  of   the   people   of   all   Germany.  In other  words,  they   advocated  a  return  to   the   program  of   1849. The  Progress  party   (Fortschrittspartei)  set   itself  in   array  against three  powers  in   the   state - the   official  class,   the   aristocracy,  and the   clergy. acted)

The  Feudal  party  replied  in   a  purely   negative  manifesto,  rejecting all   the   demands  of   the   Progressists.  The  liberal  majority of   the   retiring   deputies   advised  the   avoidance  of   hasty   action.

In   the   Chamber  elected  in   1861  the   Progress  party   had   control. It   had  carried  the   large   towns  and  the   manufacturing provinces - Saxony,  Silesia,  and  the   Rhine  Province.  The  old liberal  party   was  reduced  to   a  small  minority.  Between  these two  parties  the   Left  Centre  adhered  to   the   Progress  party   in the   struggle.

The  Conflict  Regarding  the  Constitution  (1862-66).- The struggle  had  begun  between  the   House  of   Representatives,  on behalf  of   the   people,   and   the   King,   supported  by   the   ministers and  the   House  of   Lords.  It   related  primarily  to   a  practical

The  House  assumed  a   decided  attitude  \_&gt;ward  the   ministers. It   refused  to   continue  the   provisional  vote  of   money   for   the   additions to   the   army.   It   demanded  a  regular   budget   with  the items  in   detail,   and   a   stoppage  of   the   practice   of   using   money for   a   different  purpose  than  the   one   for   which  it   was  granted. The  ministry  offered  its   resignation;  the   King   preferred  to   dissolve the   House,   and   in   March,   1862,   he   appointed  a   "   fighting ministry,"  under  Hohenlohe.

## 460  ESTABLISHMENT  OF  GERMAN   UNITY.

question.  The  voters  wished  to   maintain  the   two  years'   military service  which  had  been  in   use   for   a   score  of   years  and   seemed sufficient  for   the   defence  of   the   country.  They   were  averse  to increasing  taxes  in   order  to   support  a   heavier  military  burden Their  wish  was  so   decided  that   they   were  ready   to   resist  even  the King:   neither  dissolution  nor  royal   manifesto  could  move  them. Twice,  in   1862  and   again   in   1863,   they   re-elected  the   Progressists. The   King   held   tenaciously  by   his   project   of   army  reform; he   thought  it   a   necessity   and   regarded  his   own   judgment  as   final on  a  military  question.  He   denied  the   right   of   the   House  of Representatives  to   refuse  him   the   money  needed  for   fulfilling  his duty   as   head  of   the   army.   He   had   thoughts  of   abdicating,  but none  of   accepting  the   two  years'   service.

This  conflict  on  a   practical  question  raised  a   conflict  of   doctrine that   was  new   in   the   history   of   Prussia.  The   King,   up   to that   time,   had   always   decided  questions  of   the   army  organization on   his   own  sovereign  judgment.  If   he   declared  a   reform necessary,  could  the   houses  refuse  him  the   money  required  for the   purpose?  William  I.   had,   by   implication,  started  the   question by   definitively  creating  new  regiments,  for   which  the   Chambers had   granted   him   only   a   provisional  appropriation.  But,   on the   other  hand,   if   the   House  was  under  compulsion  to   vote  every appropriation  demanded  as  necessary  by   the   King,   it   lost   the   sole effective  right   which  the   constitution  gave   it  - the   right   to   impose the   taxes;   it   would  become  on   those  terms  a   mere  consultative body.

The  ministry  represented  the   conflict  as  one   for   the   possession of   power;  the   question  was   "   whether  the   power  of   the   government should   remain  in   the   hands  of   the   Crown  ...  or  should pass   to   the   Chamber  of   Deputies."  The   circular  to   the   administrative officers   instructing  them   how   to   influence  the   voters, spoke   of   the   opposition  between  the   King's   government  and   the "   democratic  party,"   which  was  exerting  itself  to   establish  "   the so-called  Parliamentary  government  "   by   "   transferring  the centre  of   gravity   of   public   power   from  the   Crown  to   the   representatives of   the   people."  The  Progressives  defended  themselves from   the   charge   of   attacking   the   constitutional  rights   of   the Crown;  the   question  to   be   decided  was  "   whether,  side  by   side with   the   great   power  of   the   government,  the   constitutional  right of   the   people's   representatives  should  have  a   meaning  or  not." The  question  was  not,  therefore,  as   in   France  in   the   time  of Charles  X.,   squarely  presented  in   the   form  of   a   conflict  between

a   constitutional  system  and  a  parliamentary  system.  The  point was  not  whether  the   King   or   the   House  should  ordinarily  have the   last   word.  The  two  opposing  parties  were  not  agreed  in saying  what  the   question  really   was.  The  King   said  it   was whether  the  system  of   the   constitution  was  to   be   maintained against  an  attempt  at   a   parliamentary  system;  the   Chamber  said it   was   defending  the   constitution  against   an  absolutist  pretension. A   fact   which  muddled  the   question  was  that  the   House  drew  its powers  from  the   Constitution  of   1850,   a   copy  of   a   foreign   constitution which   was   founded  on   the   sovereignty  of   the   people,   and that  the   King   held  his   from  the   traditional  military  monarchy. If   between  these  two  powers,  springing  from  contradictory sources,  a  conflict  arose,  neither  the   constitution  nor  tradition indicated  a   method  of   settling   it.

The  King   dissolved  the   House  (1862);  but   the   Progressists were  re-elected,  and   in   sufficient  number  to   supply   a   majority  of their  own.  The  former  ministerial  liberals  disappeared.

The  ministry  attempted  to  conciliate  the  majority  by   some concessions  in   foreign   policy;   it   recognised  the   new   Kingdom  of Italy   and   it   intervened  in   Hesse-Cassel.  It   also  made  some vague  promises  of   concessions  regarding  the   army.  But  after long   negotiations,  the   House,  by   308   votes  against   10,   refused  to continue  the   appropriation  provisionally  voted  in   the   preceding years,   for   carrying  out  the   army  reorganization.

The  King   hesitated,  was   inclined  to   abdicate,  even  drew  up   his act   of   abdication,  but   later   called  on   Bismarck  and   charged  him to   form  a   righting   ministry  (un   ministere  de   combat).  Bismarck, a   gentleman  of   Brandenburg,  had   distinguished  himself  as  early as  1847   by   his   hatred  of   Parliamentary  government  and   his   devotion to   the   absolute  monarchy.  He   had   protested,  in   1849, against  introducing  into  monarchical  Prussia  the   constitutional arrangements  of   the   west,  particularly  against   Parliamentary  control of   the   budget.  He   accepted  the   leadership  of   the   government with   a   pledge   never  to   yield.

Bismarck  came  into  power  with  a  policy   already  marked  out, which  he   expressed,  in   conversation  with  the   members  of   the budget  committee,  in   symbolical  terms :   "   We   are   fond  of   carrying a   suit   of   armour  too  stout  for   our   lean   body,   so  we  ought   to make  use  of   it."  He   also  said :   "   It   is   not   Prussia's  liberalism that   Germany  looks  to,   but   her   military  power."  "   The   unity   of Germany  is   to   be   brought  about,  not   by   speeches  nor   by   votes of   majorities,  but   by   blood   and   iron"  As   Prussian  envoy  at   the

Diet  he   had  learned  to   despise  the  Confederation,  in   which Prussia  was  always  outvoted;  he   wished  to  see   it   broken  up. He   looked  forward  to   a   war  with   Austria;  and   for   this   war,  which must  decide  the   fate   of   Germany,  he   wished  the   Prussian  army to   be   powerful  and   capable  of   rapid   movement.  He   stood  for the   reorganization,  therefore,  as  strongly  as   the   King.

By   intrusting  the   government  to   so  noted  a   representative  of the   Junker   party,   the   King   broke  once  for   all   with   the   Chamber. When  Bismarck  presented  himself  before  the   Budget  Committee with  an  olive  branch,  plucked  by   him  at   Avignon,  this   symbol of   conciliation  was  looked  upon  as   derisive.  The  Chamber raised  the   constitutional  question.  It   abandoned  the   practice  of continuing  provisionally  the   expenditures  of   the   preceding  year, without  having  voted  them ;   and  it   declared  it   "   contrary  to   the constitution  that  the   government  should  make  an  expenditure rejected  by   the   Chamber."  The  ministry  answered  by   carrying its   budget   to   the   House  of   Lords,   which  passed   it   by   an  enormous majority.  The   Lower  House  declared  this   action  null   and void,   as  contrary  to   the   constitution,  as   the   budget   must  be   voted mous in   the   first   place   by   the   people's   representatives  (October,  1862). The  House  relied  on  the   formal  text  in   asserting  that  the ministers  had   violated  the   constitution.*  Bismarck  urged   in   reply the   theory   of   an  omission  in   the   constitution.  He   admitted that   the   ministry  was  about  to   be   "   forced  to   manage  the   budget without  the   basis  prescribed  by   the   constitution  " ; but   he   contended that   he   was   in   duty   bound  to   "   cover  the   expenses  necessary for   maintaining  the   institutions  of   the   state  and   the   welfare of   the   country."  The   constitution,  he   argued,   contained  no  provision for   the   case.   The   omission  could  be   supplied  only   by recurring  to   the   law   as   it   stood  before  the   Constitution  of   1850. Now  in   Prussia  the   old   law   admitted  the   unlimited  power  of   the King;  the  King   then  must  have  the  power  of   adopting  the budget.  The  Constitution  of   1850   had  established  three  legislative powers,   the   King,   the   Chamber  of   Deputies,  and   the   House of   Lords,  and   had   given   all   three  equal   power,  even  in   budget matters.  No   one  of   the   three  had   the   right   of   forcing   the   others to   yield.   For   the   case  of   disagreement  the   constitution  provided

* ' ' All   the   revenues  and  expenditures  of   the  state  shall  be   annually estimated  in   advance  and  set   down  in   the  budget  ;   the  budget  is   fixed annually  by   a   law   "   (Article  99).   "   The  taxes  and   dues  for   the   treasury  of the   state  can  only   be   levied  as   they   are  set   down  in   the  budget  or  ordained by   special   laws  "   (Article  100).

no  solution;  it   assumed  an  agreement  by   compromises.  "   If compromises  are  out  of   the   question  because  one  of   the   powers insists  on   its   own  will   with   a   doctrinaire  absolutism,  then  .   .   . instead  of   compromises  we   have  conflicts;  and   as   the   life   of   the state  cannot  be   arrested,  the   conflicts  become  questions  of   force   " (1863).  This  saying,  twisted  by   Bismarck's  opponents,  became the   famous  formula  "   Force  beats  law."

Official  candidacy,  already  tried  in   1862  in   the   form  of   a   circular to   the   officials,   was  openly   established.  An   order  was issued  by   the   King,   declaring  that   the   oath   of   fealty   and   obedience taken  by   officials  required  them  "   to   follow  as  voters  the   course indicated  by   the   King."

The  struggle  became  a  conflict  of   forces.  Now  the   House had  only   the   moral  force  of   public   opinion  and   the   legal   right of   voting   the   budget.  The  ministry,  supported  by   the   King, had  the   physical   force  of   the   army  and   the   machinery  for   levying the   taxes.  The   ministry  went  on  with  its   own   idea.  It   remained in   office  three  years,  acting   on  an  unconstitutional  budget,  irregularly voted   by   the   House  of   Lords.  It   got   the   Lower  House dissolved  again   in   1863;   but   the   Progressives  came  back  with  a still   stronger  majority.  The   ministry  was  not  moved ; it   only   gave up   presenting  the   budget   to   the   House,  and   cut  the   sessions  of the  Landtag  as  short  as  possible.  Against  its   opponents  it copied  the   methods  of   Napoleon  III.   (see   pp.   ooo-oo).

Against  the   journals  the   government  suspended  liberty   of   the press  as  given   by   the   constitution,  and   established  the   system  of notifications.  The  government  assumed  the  right   of   notifying any   paper   dangerous  to   "   the   public   welfare,"  and   of   suppressing it   after  two  notifications.  It   said  in   explanation  that  it   was necessary  to   forbid  all   criticism  of   the   acts  of   the   government. The  chief  liberal  newspapers  were  suppressed  or  reduced  to silence.  The  government  proceeded  against  the   elective  municipalities by   refusing  to   install  the   officers-elect,  naming  in   their stead  commissioners  of   their  own  appointment - a   thing   which had  never  been  done  in   Prussia  since  the   establishment  of   the municipalities.

To   this   government  pressure  the   people   and   their  representatives could   oppose  nothing   but   displays   of   public   opinion.  The House  of   Representatives  voted  addresses,  which  the   King   declined to   receive;  it   protested  against   the   press  ordinance  as   contrary to   the   constitution;  it   voted  an   inquiry   into   the   pressure put   upon  the   elections,  but   the   government  prevented  the   in-

quiry;   it   passed   a   bill   to   enforce  the   responsibility  of   ministers (1863).  The  municipal  councils  presented  petitions,  but  were fined  for   their  action;  the   cities  organized  meetings,  which  the government  prohibited;  they   refused  to   celebrate  the   royal   anniversaries.

All   through  these  years   the   House  was  protesting  against  the foreign  policy   of   Bismarck - the   convention  with  Russia  for   the extradition  of   Polish  refugees  (1863),  the   Schleswig-Holstein expedition  (1864),   and   the   war  with   Austria  (1866).

The  National-Liberal  Agitation  in   Germany  (1859-64). - In   the other  states  of   Germany  political  life   had   been  awakened  again, as   in   Prussia,  by   the   Italian  war.  In   1859   Germany  emerged from  the   absolutist  and   states-rights  reaction  and   entered  a   period of   agitations  at   once   liberal  and   national.  It   was  a   time   of   confusion and   conflict.  The   individual  governments  wished  to   keep up   the   autocratic  system,  while  their  subjects  were  demanding a   return  to   the   constitutional  ideas  of   1848.   The   governments were  bent  on  maintaining  their  separate  sovereignty;  the   national parties  demanded  the   unity   of   Germany.  Almost  everywhere there  was  a  national-liberal  party  contending  against  a  staterights   autocratic  party.  But  the   supporters  of   union  were  divided, some  wishing   Prussia,  others  Austria,  to   be   at   the   head. There  was,   then,   internal  conflict  in   each   state   both   on  a   domestic constitutional  question,  and  at   the   same  time  on  the   national question;  conflict  in   the   federal  government  between  the   two great  powers,  and  conflict  between  their  supporters  throughout Germany.

In   the   domestic  conflict  of   the   various  states,  the   elected Chamber  contended  with  the   official  body   in   the   name  of   the   constitution or   of   liberty.  The  most  famous  of   these  conflicts  took place   in   Hesse-Cassel  regarding  the   Constitution  of   1831,   unlawfully suppressed  in   1849.   The   elector  was  compelled  to   re-establish it,   under  threats  from  the   other  sovereigns.

On  the   national  question,  since  the   fear   had   arisen  that   Napoleon III.   might   attack  Germany,  there  was  a   general   agreement that   a   reform  of   the   Confederation  was  needed  to   make  it capable  of   resisting   foreign   attack.  But   as   to   the   precise   reform to   be   made,   there   was  the   same  disagreement  as   in   1848.   The reformers  were  still  face  to   face   with  two  insoluble  questions: i.   Who   should  have   the   leadership?  The   King   of   Prussia  would enter  no  union  in   which  he   should  not   be   the   head;   the   other kings   would  not   hear  of   the   King   of   Prussia.  2.   What  coun-

tries   should  belong   to   the   union?  Austria  would  come  in   only on  condition  of   bringing  in   her   whole  empire;  the   Germans  were unwilling  to  admit  the   un-German  parts  of   it.   The  parties  of 1848  - the   Prussian  party,  or   Kleindeutsche,  and  the  Austrian party,  or   Grossdeutsche - were  therefore  still   at   the   force.

Two  political  clubs  had   sprung  up   representing  these  two  conflicting policies.   The   National  Union,   founded  in   1859,   on   the model  of   the   Italian  Union,   to   labour  for   the   union  of   Germany, proposed  a  close  federation,  with  an  assembly  of   representatives under  the   presidency  of   Prussia,  according  to   the   plan   of   Union projected  in   the  year  1850.  This  club  was  controlled  by former  members  of   the   Gotha  Reunion,  chiefly   professors,  and had   its   strength   in.   northern  Germany.  The   Reform  Club,   started in   1862,   advocated  a   looser  federation,  with  a   collective  directory and   a   chamber  composed  of   delegates  from  the   local  legislatures, in   such  manner  as  to   let   Austria  come  in.  This  club  had  its strength  in   southern  Germany,  especially  Bavaria.

The  agitation  carried  on   by   these  clubs,   in   these  years  of   reawakening public   life,   of   patriotic   festivals  and   scientific  congresses, forcibly   attracted  the   attention  of   the   educated  classes and  even  disquieted  the   state  governments.  Several  of   these forbade  their  subjects  to   join   the   "   National  Union."  But   the real   decision  of   the   great   question   lay   with   the   two   leading   German states.

The  Austrian  government,  which  had  just   established  a   constitutional system   in   its   own  empire,   had   on   its   side   the   majority of   the   German  princes,  enemies  of   the   King   of   Prussia.  These had  met  in   conference  as  early   as  1859,   at   Wurzburg,  and   had proposed  a   scheme  of   reform  for   the   confederation.  This   had   been discussed,  in   a   leisurely  way,   during   the   three  subsequent  years. Prussia  rejected  it   in   1860.  Austria  accepted  the   general   principle of   it   in   1861,   and,   after   long   negotiations,  finally   convened a   Congress  of   the   Princes  at   Frankfort,  in   August,  1863.   This body   adopted  the   Austrian  plan   of   reforms:  a   Directory  of   six members - Austria,  Prussia,  Bavaria,  and  three  other  states  in alternation;  a   Federal  Council  of   21  votes,   in   which  a   two-thirds majority  should  be   necessary  for   making  war;  an   Assembly  of 302   delegates  from  the   legislatures  of   the   different  states;  and   a Federal  Tribunal.  Twenty-four  princes  signified  their  acceptance of   the   plan.   But   without  the   adhesion  of   Prussia  it   was impossible,  and   Prussia  refused.

'Bismarck  would  hear  no  more  of   a  confederation  to   which

Austria  belonged  and  in   which  she   was  sure  to   hold  Prussia  in check;  he   wished  to   replace   it   with   a   new  union  under  Prussian leadership,  without  Austria.  As   early   as  1862  he   declared  to   the Austrian  ambassador  that  Austria  ought   to   withdraw  from  Germany and   "   transfer  her   centre  of   gravity   to   Ofen   " - that   is,   to Hungary.  In   communicating  the   refusal  of   Prussia  to   take  part in   the   Congress  of   Princes,  he   twice  explained  his   own  project of   union  (January  and   August,  1863) :   instead  of   a   confederation, a   union,   with   a   military   system  and   a   treasury  of   its   own;   instead of   a   collective  Directory,  a  single   head,   the   King   of   Prussia; instead  of   a   meeting   of   delegates  of   the   legislatures,  an   Assembly of   Representatives  of   the   people,  chosen  by   direct  election,  in proportion  to  population, - "   the  sole  legitimate  organ  of   the German  nation," - a  necessary  agent   for   overcoming  the   resistance of   the   state  governments.  This  was  the   old   revolutionary scheme  of   1849.

A   meeting  of   liberal  members  of   the   legislatures  of   the   different states,   and   a   general   gathering  of   the   "   National  Union  " (September-October,  1862),  had  just   declared  for   the   Constitution of   1849.  It   seemed,  then,   that  the   national  party   throughout Germany  was  going   to   support  Prussia,  which  was  resuming her   old   program.  In   1861  the   "   National  Union,"  in   its   manifesto, had   declared  that   Germany  needed  Prussia  and   that   they must  "   push   Prussia  along   the   right   road."  But  the   German patriots  were  at   the   same  time  liberals,  and   the   hostility  of   King William's  government  to   liberalism  made  them  despair  of   Prussia. When  Bismarck  published  his   scheme  of   reform,  they   did not   believe  him  to   be   sincere:  they   thought  him  a  champion  of autocracy  and  of   Prussia,  like   his   party.   A   portion  of   the   German liberals  turned  toward  Austria,  at   that   time  governed  by   a liberal  German  minister;  the   Emperor,  when  on   his   way   to   the Congress  of   Princes,  in   1863,   was  received  with  popular  demonstrations in   the   cities   of   Southern  Germany.

As   regards  the   German  princes,  most  of   the   greater  ones  were still   hostile  to   Prussia.  Hardly   any   were  for   her   except   her   little neighbours  in   the   north,   and   Baden  in   the   south.  In   the   crisis that   had   come  on   Germany,  the   great   majority  both  of   governments and   subjects   were  going   to   take   part   against   Prussia.

Crisis  of   the   Duchies  (1864-66). - Bismarck  announced  that  the question  of   union  would  be   solved  only   by   force.  He   was  therefore preparing  for   war   both   by   military   measures  and   diplomacy. He   needed  an  army  capable  of   winning  prompt  victories,  and   so

was  maintaining  the   reorganization  of   the   Prussian  army  at   the cost  of   a   quarrel   with   the   whole  nation.  He   needed  the   support or  the   neutrality  of   the   great   European  powers,  for   in   the European  balance  of   power   Germany  had   been  treated  as  a   country without  a   master,  where  all   Europe   had   the   right   of   intervention. The   key   of   success  therefore  lay   in   diplomacy.  Bismarck was  above  all   a   diplomatist - a   diplomatist  of   the   new  school which,  breaking  with  the   polite   forms  and   smooth  falsehoods  of usage,  went  on  the   plan   of   saying   exactly   what  was  to   be   done. He   manoeuvred  in   such  a   way  as   to   isolate  Austria;  he   won   Russia to   his   side   by   aiding   her   against   the   Poles ; France,  by   letting Napoleon  believe  that   he   would  help   him  in   annexing  territory; Italy,   by   the   promise   of   Venetia.  As   for   England,  he   saw  that, for   a   Continental  war,   her   support  could  be   dispensed  with.

The  union  of   Germany  was  accomplished,  as   he   foretold,  by blood  and   iron,   in   three  wars:  with   Denmark  in   1864,   with   Aus- tria in   1866,   and' with  France  in   1870-71. The  war  with  Denmark  arose  from  a   disputed  succession  to the   crown  of   the   duchies  of   Schleswig  and   Holstein.  The  contest was   between  Christian,  the   new  King   of   Denmark,  and Frederick  Duke  of   Augustenburg.  The  settlement  decreed  in 1852   by   the   great   powers  of   Europe   in   favour  of   Christian,  had not   been  ratified  by   the   German  Diet  nor   by   the   assemblies  of the   "   estates  "   representing  the   people   of   the   two   duchies,  nor   by the   heir   of   the   Duke  of   Augustenburg.  Of   the   German  powers, Austria  and  Prussia  alone  had  pledged  themselves.  When,  in 1863,   the   throne  became  vacant  by   the   death  of   Frederick  VII. of   Denmark,  the   assemblies  of   the   duchies  proclaimed  the   accession of   Frederick  VIIL,  the   Augustenburg  candidate;  Holstein, whose  population  was  purely   German,  and   Schleswig,  where,  except in   the   north,   the   great   majority  was   German,  announced their  separation  from  Denmark  in   order  to   unite  with  Germany. The  question  of   the   duchies  thus  became  a  national  question. German  patriots  took  up   the   cause  of   the   Germans  in   the   duchies and  the  German  prince  Frederick  VIIL  against  the  Danish foreigners.

It   was  at   first   a   patriotic   popular   movement.  The   two  great political  clubs  opened  subscriptions,  and  enrolled  volunteers  in order  to   expel   the   Danes.  In   December,  1863,   acting   in   concert, they   called  a   congress  of   members  of   the   state   legislatures,  which named  a   committee  of   thirty-six  to   direct  the   movement  in   favour of   the   independence  of   the   duchies.  The   legislatures  of   the   dif-

ferent  states  were  urging   on   their   governments,  obliging  them  to recognise  Frederick  VIII.  and  then  to   vote  in   the   Diet  to   send a   federal  "   army  of   execution  "   to   Holstein,  where  a   government had  been  formed  in   the   name  of   Frederick  VIII.  (December, 1863).

Prussia  and  Austria  opposed  this   move,  though  it   was  urged by   their   elected  Chambers.  They   asked  that   the   appeal   of   the Duke  of   Augustenburg  be   rejected  by   the   Diet,   and   even  that   the committee  of   thirty-six  be   dispersed.  The   other  states  declined this   course.  Germany  was  dividing  into  two  camps:  on  the   one side,   the   governments  of   the   two  great   powers  which  were  for recognising  King   Christian  as  successor  to   the   ducal  crown,  on condition  of   establishing  only   a  personal  union  between  the duchies  and  Denmark;  on  the  other  side  all   the   other  governments and   all   the   liberals,   including   those   of   Prussia  and   Austria.

Bismarck,  without  concerning  himself  about  public  opinion, induced  Austria  to   join   him   in   the   opposition  to   the   action  of   the Diet.  Austria  and  Prussia  called  on  the   King   of   Denmark  to give   Schleswig  an   independent  government,  and  on   his   refusal decided  on  war  (January,  1864).  This  was  a   distinct  war  from that  decreed,  by   way  of   federal  execution,  by   the   Diet.  The Prussian  and   Austrian  armies  occupied  the   two  duchies  without a   battle,   compelling  the   federal  army  of   execution  to   withdraw (this   was  composed  of   Saxon  and   Hanoverian  troops).  The  war was  fought   in   Danish  territory.  While  it   was  going   on   Prussia and   Austria  declared  that   the   only   solution  was  the   recognition of   Frederick  of   Augustenburg  (May,   1864).  But   at   the   treaty  of peace   (August,  1864)   they   compelled  Christian  to   cede  his   claims to   the   duchies,  not  to   the   Duke  of   Augustenburg,  but   to   the   King of   Prussia  and   the   Emperor  of   Austria.  They   took  possession by   instituting  a   provisional  administration  controlled  by   a   joint commission  of   two  members,  one   Prussian,  the   other  Austrian.

As   to   the   final   disposition  of   the   duchies,  the   two  governments were  unable  to   agree.  They   did   not  yet   dare  to   cast  aside  the claims  of   the   Duke  of   Augustenburg,  indorsed  by   themselves  in May,   1864,   and   still   sustained  by   public   opinion   in   Germany  and in   the   duchies.  But   before  allowing  the   Duke  to   come  into   possession, Prussia   demanded  the   entry   of   the   duchies  into   the   Zollverein,   a   treaty   whereby  the   military   force  of   the   duchies  should belong  to   the   Prussian  army,  and   the   cession  of   the   port   of   Kiel and   several  forts   and   military   roads  in   such   fashion  as   to   honeycomb the   territory   with   Prussian  forces  (February,  1865).   The

Duke  hesitated,  and  laid  down  as  a  condition  that  the   treaty should  be   agreed   to   by   the   representatives  of   the   people.  Now, the   people   of   the   duchies,  by   various  manifestations,  'had   shown an  aversion  to   the   Prussian  government.

Bismarck  then  proposed  annexation  to   Prussia.  Austria  rejected this.   In   the   duchies  the   Prussian  commissioner,  by   his manner  of   treating  the   local  authorities,  had   put   himself  in   conflict with   his   Austrian  colleague.  People   began   to   talk   of   a   war between  Austria  and  Prussia.  Bismarck  wished  it,   knowing that   Austria  was  not  ready.  One   battle,   he   said   to   the   Bavarian minister,  would  suffice  to   enable  Prussia  to   dictate  'her   terms. But  King   William  preferred  peace.  By   the   Convention  of   Gastein   (August,  1865)   the   two  powers  shared  the   possession  of   the duchies,  Austria  taking   Holstein  and  Prussia  Schleswig.

An   assembly  of   delegates  of   the   state  legislatures  of   Germany, convoked  at   Frankfort  in   October,  declared  the   Convention  of Gastein  a   "   violation  of   right."   In   the   name  of   the   right   of   the people  of   Schleswig-Holstein  to   decide  their  own  fate,   the assembly  invited  the   people  of   the   duchies  to   persist   and   the whole  people   of   Germany  to   sustain  them.  Prussia  and   Austria replied   by   sending   threatening  despatches  to   the   Diet  of   Frankfort, informing   it   that   they   could  no   longer   endure  those   "   subversive manoeuvres,"  and   that   they   regarded  the   committee  of thirty-six  as  a   permanent  organ   for   the   revolutionary  party   of Germany.  In   the   Diet,   the   governments  of   the   other  states,   intimidated, did   not  venture  to   come  to   any   decision.  In   Schleswig the   Prussian  government  systematically  persecuted  the   advocates of   independence,  threatened  to   arrest  the   Duke  if   he   entered the   duchy,   confiscated  newspapers  that   gave   him   the   title   of   Duke of   Schleswig,  took   revenge  on  a   town  that   had   received  the   Duke by   placing  a   Prussian  garrison  in   it,   suppressed  all   patriotic societies,  dismissed  public   officers  favouring  independence,  and even  replaced  them  with  Danish  sympathizers.  Prussia  had  on her   side   in   the   duchies  only   Danes  and   a   few   nobles;   her   policy in   Schleswig  brought  her   into   collision  with  the   patriots  of   the duchies  and   with  all   the   liberals  in   Germany.  But   their  protestations were   lost   on   the   Prussian  army,  which   formed  the   reliance of   the   Prussian  government.

Dissolution  of   the   Confederation  (1866). - In   making  the   war of   1864   in   their   own  way,   displacing  the   agents   of   the   Diet,   Austria and   Prussia  had   morally   destroyed  the   confederation  made by   them  in   1815   with   the   other  German  states.  When,  later,

## 47°  ESTABLISHMENT  OF  GERMAN   UNITY.

they   broke  with  each  other,  they   destroyed  it   effectually;  and there  was  nothing  left   for   them  to   do,   after   the   war,   but   to   recognise officially   the   destruction  they   had   wrought.

The  rupture  between  Austria  and   Prussia,  delayed  by   the   Convention of   Gastein,  came  about  on  account  of   the   duchies.  The Austrian  governor  of   Holstein,  following  a  policy   opposed  to that  of   the   Prussians  in   Schleswig,  encouraged  the   partisans  of independence  and  Duke  Frederick.  He   allowed  them  to   hold  an assembly  which  demanded  the   convocation  of   the   regular  representatives of   the   duchies  (January,  1866).  Bismarck  charged the   Austrian  government  with  aiding   a   revolutionary  movement, and   summoned  it   to   say   plainly   whether  it   wished  to   act   in   harmony with   Prussia.  The   Emperor  answered  that  he   had   done nothing  of   which  Prussia  had  a  right   to   complain,  but   that   he could  not,   to   please   her,   make  any   further  sacrifice  of   his   good relations  with  the   other  German  states.

Prussia  at   once  began   preparations  for   war   by   negotiating  with Italy.   She   sent  to   the   Diet   a   plan   of   radical  reform  of   the   confederation, including   a   parliament  elected  by   universal  suffrage (April,  1866).  Austria  made  friendly  understandings  with  the other  states,  taking  advantage  of   the  indignation  felt  by   the liberals  and  patriots  against  Prussia;  most  of   the   legislatures were  in   her   favour  and   voted  additional  military  supplies.  Both sides  were  arming.  Austria  convoked  the  "   estates  "   of   Holstein.

The  offensive  was  taken  by   Prussia.  She   marched  her   troops into   Holstein,  and   the   Austrian  troops  withdrew.  Austria  asked the   Diet   to   intervene  and   call   out   the   federal  troops.  The   public rupture  was  made  by   the   vote  on  this   question  (June   14). There  were  nine  votes  in   favour  and  six   against - Prussia  not voting.  As   to   two  of   the   votes  included  in   the   majority  there was  some  doubt,  as   they   were  cast   in   the   name  of   groups  of   small states  some  of   which  had   not  clearly   expressed  their  judgment. Prussia  declared  at   once  that   she   regarded  the   federal  compact  as broken - announcing,  however,  at   the   same  time  that  she   "   held to   the   unity   of   the   German  nation  "   and   would  endeavour  to   reestablish it   on  a   more  solid  basis.  She   published  her   scheme  of a   federal  constitution  with   an  elected  parliament.

The  states  that   had   refused  to   vote   (Oldenburg,  Mecklenburg, and  Luxemburg)  remained  neutral.  Those  which  had  voted with  Austria  made  an  alliance  with  her   against  Prussia.  The war  was  between  Prussia  single-handed,  on  the   one  side,   and

Austria  and  the   chief  German  states  on  the   other.  The  four kingdoms,  Bavaria,  Wurtemburg,  Saxony,  and  Hanover,  the two  Hesses,  Nassau,  and   Baden  all   took  up   arms  against   Prussia. But,   in   addition  to   the   alliance  with   Italy,  - which  gave  occupation to   a   part   of   the   Austrian  forces,  - Prussia  had   the   advantage of   an  army   better  prepared  and   a   more  rapid   mobilization.  She made  war  simultaneously  in   three  separate  quarters  of   Germany, and   in   all   three   she   took   the   offensive.

1.   In   Northern  Germany,  she   invaded  Hanover,  Hesse-Cassel, and   Nassau,  after  an  ultimatum  which  offered  them  neutrality  on condition  of   disarming  and   accepting  the   Prussian  plan   of   union. She   occupied  the   whole  territory  of   Hanover,  surprised  its   army on   the   march  to   join   Saxony,   and,   in   spite   of   initial  defeat,   compelled it   to   surrender  at   Langensalza,  June   25.
2.   In   the   southeast  she   occupied  Saxony  without  a   battle. Then,  with  three  armies,  she   invaded  Bohemia,  where  the   struggle with  Austria  was  decided  in   a   single   battle  at   Sadowa,  July   4.
3.   In   the   southwest  the   Bavarian  army  and   the   armies  of   the other  South  German  states  lost  time  in   confused  operations  and had  not  even  succeeded  in   joining  forces  before  the   battle  of Sadowa.     A   Prussian  army,  attacking  them  separately,  defeated them   and    occupied    Frankfort.     This    free    city    was    severely treated :   the   Prussian  general   arrested  several  of   its   senators,  suppressed its   newspapers,  and  imposed  a  war  contribution  of   six million  thalers.     His  successor  demanded  twenty-five  millions under  threat  of   burning  the   city.      The   burgomaster,  in   despair, hanged  himself.    The  southern  states,  abandoned  by   Austria, sued  for   peace.

The  immediate  result  of   the   war  was  the   formal  dissolution of   the   Confederation.  Austria  accepted  this   result  and   gave   her consent  to   a   new  organization  of   Germany,  in   which  she   should have  no  part.   Prussia,  thus  made  sole  mistress  of   Germany, established  a   new  union  in   accordance  with  her   own  plan,   compelling all   the   states  north  of   the   river   Main   to   join   it.   Only   four German  states  remained  outside  of   it  - Bavaria,  Wurtemburg, Baden,  and  Hesse-Darmstadt.  The  "   line  of   the   Main  "   was adopted  on  the   demand  of   foreign  powers,  especially  of   France, which  hoped   to   limit  the   extent  of   the   new  union,  and   to   play off   a   southern  confederation  against   the   northern  one.  But   the southern  states  had  already  concluded  treaties  of   alliance,  offensive and   defensive,  with   Prussia;  the   South  German  confederation was   never   formed.

The  Prussian  victory  ended  the   rivalry   between  the   two  great powers,  which  had  maintained  the   system  of   petty   states  and   the dualism  of   Germany;  but   it   has   done  so  at   the   cost  of   expelling eight   millions  of   Germans,  subjects  of   Austria.  It   was  the   final abandonment  of   the   Greater-Germany  idea  - the   triumph  of   the Prussian  scheme  of   a   Lesser-Germany.

Annexations  by   Prussia. - Prussia  immediately  took  advantage of   her   commanding  position  to  round  out   her   territory.  The duchies  of   Schleswig  and   Holstein  she   annexed  outright  without consulting  the   inhabitants,  even  of   the   north,  although  a  clause of   the   treaty   of   Prague   provided   " that   the   people   of   the   northern districts  of   Schleswig  shall  be   ceded  to   Denmark,  if   by   a   free   vote they   manifest  a   desire  for   union  with  that   country."  Bismarck relied  only   on  the   right   of   conquest.  Austria  had  ceded  her rights   in   the   larger   duchies  to   Prussia  by   the   treaty   of   Prague. Her  share  in   the   duchy   of   Lauenburg  she   had   sold   to   Prussia  before the   war.

Prussia  also   annexed  the   three  states  lying   between  her   western provinces  and   the   rest  of   the   Kingdom:  Hanover,  HesseCassel  and  Nassau  ;   also   the   city   of   Frankfort.  The   King's   message announcing  these  annexations  justified  them  by   the   judgment of   God  and  the   duties  of   Prussia.  "   The  governments  of those  states  .   .   . by   rejecting  the   neutrality  off   ered   by   Prussia  .   .   . appealed  to   the   arbitrament  of   war.  The   issue,   by   the   decree  of God,   has   gone  against   them.  Political  necessity  compels  us  not to   restore  to   them   the   authority  of   which  they   have   been  deprived by   the   victories  of   our  armies.  These  countries,  if   they   kept their  independence,  could,  by   reason  of   their  geographical  position, create  embarrassments  for   Prussia  far   beyond   the   measure of   their   natural  power."  The  bill   providing  for   their  annexation declared  that   Prussia  ought   not  to   be   obliged,  in   case  of   war,   to "   employ   an   important  part   of   her   forces  in   occupying  countries that   menaced  her   in   the   rear."  It   added  that   the   governments  of the   annexed  states,   "   by   their  obstinate  refusal  of   reform  in   the Confederation,"  had   made  their  retention  impossible  by   showing that   it   was  not   to   be   reconciled  with   an  organization  satisfactory to   the   German  nation. ern

The  committee  of   the   Lower  House  sought  another  title  than that   of   conquest  : it   held   that   "   mere  force  alone  now  no   longer suffices  as  a   basis  of   national  ownership;  no  professor  of   international law   recognises  it   as  giving   title."  Bismarck  replied: "   Our   right   is   the   right   of   the   German  nation  to   exist,   to   breathe,

to   unite;   it   is   the   right   and   duty   of   Prussia  to   give   Germany   the condition  of   things   necessary  for   her   existence."

In   contrast  with  Italy   and   France,  which  had   a   popular  vote taken  before  every  annexation,  Prussia  consulted  none  of   the annexed  communities.  The  royal   message  admitted  that  "   only a   part   of   the   inhabitants  agreed   in   the   necessity   "   of   annexation, but   it   expressed  the   "   confidence  that   a   living   participation  in the  continued  development  of   the  common  nationality  .   .   . would  make  easy   for   them  the   transition  into   a   new  and   larger community."  The  people  of   Hesse-Cassel  and  Nassau  accepted without  resistance  the  Prussian  connection.  Those  of   the northern  duchies,  except  the   Danes  of   Schleswig,  resigned  themselves to   it,   joining   at   the   same  time   the   Liberal  opposition.  In Hanover  a   large   body   of   dissatisfied  people   hoped   for   some  years for   a   return  of   the   old   dynasty,  and   formed  a   "   Guelph   "   party strong  enough  to   carry  some  parliamentary  seats.  At   Frankfort many  young  men  got  themselves  naturalized  as  citizens  of Switzerland;  but  the  Prussian  government  announced  that  it should  treat  as   Prussians  all   who   remained  in   the   country.

By   the   annexations  Prussia  raised  her   population  to   25,000,000 and  gave   her   territory  a  cohesion  which  it   had   always   lacked. But  by   her   appeal   to   the   old   right   of   conquest,  by   her   decision not  to   recognise  the   right   of   the   people   affected  to   vote  on   the question  of   annexation,  by   the   language  of   Bismarck,  so   different from  the  delicate  formalities  of   diplomacy,  by   the   repressive actions  of   the   Prussian  generals  in   Schleswig  and   at   Frankfort, she   gave   Europe  the   impression  of   a   barbarous  power  greedy for  conquests,  and  aroused  apprehensions  which  twenty-five years  of   a   peaceable  policy   have  hardly   sufficed  to   dissipate.

Formation  of   the   North  German  Confederation  (1866-67). The  union  of   Northern  Germany  spoken  of   in   the  treaty  of Prague  was  formed  by   agreement  between  the   governments  of the   states  and   the   King   of   Prussia  in   1866.  Then  the   draft  of   a constitution,  based  on  these  agreements,  was  discussed  and  accepted by   an  assembly  elected  by   universal  suffrage  (1867).

The  North  German  Confederation  (Norddeutsche  Bund)  included all   Germany  except  the  four  states  of   the   south;  even Hesse-Darmstadt  entered  it   for   her   fragment  of   territory  north of   the   Main.  Although  it   still   bore  the   old   name  of   Bund,   it differed  profoundly  from  the   Bund  of   1815.   According  to   the expression  of   theoretic  writers,  it   was  not  a   "   federation  of   states  " (Staatenbund),  but  a   federal  state  (Bundesstaat).  Each  of   the

states  preserved  its   own  government,  but   they   all   became  subject to   a   superior  government,  armed  with  physical  power.

This  federal  government  was  organized  according  to   the   plan which  had  been  officially  proposed  by   Bismarck  in   1865   and 1866,   and  which  revived  the   program  of   the  Union  of   1849. It   was  composed  of   a   Presidency  permanently  assigned  to   the King   of   Prussia,  a   Federal  Council  (Bundesratti)  representing  the various  governments,  and  an  elected  assembly  (Reichstag)  representing the   people.   A   place   was  thus   formed  for   each   of   the three  forces  which  contended  for   the   control  of   Germany, - the King   of   Prussia,  the   sovereign  princes,  and  the   elective  parliament,- but   their   powers  were  not  equal.   The   Prussian  government, victorious  over  the   other  governments  and  the   parliamentary opposition,   took   for   itself   the   controlling  position   in   the new  Germany.

The  King   of   Prussia  exercised  his   Presidency  through  a   chancellor chosen   at   his   pleasure.  He   held   all   the   powers,  military as  well  as   diplomatic,  the   right   to   make  war  and   to   conclude treaties,  the   right   to   appoint   and   receive  ambassadors,  the   position of   commander-in-chief  of   the   federal  army,  with  the   right of   appointing  all   the   corps  commanders  and   heads  of   garrisons, the   right   to   determine  the   organization  of   the   federal  army,  to decree  regulations  and   to   supervise  the   execution  of   them.  He was  also  the   political  sovereign  for   home  affairs;  head  of   the federal  government,  whose  officers  he   appointed,  with  the   power of   keeping  the   other  members  of   the   union  to   their  duty   by   the use  of   military   force.

The  Federal  Council  consisted  of   delegates  from  the   several states,  government  officers,  bound  by   their  instructions  as   in   the old   Diet.  It   had   permanent  committees  to   act   for   it   when  not in   session.  The  votes  in   the   Council  were  distributed  among the   princes   as   in   the   former  Diet;   there  were  forty-three  in   all, of   which  Prussia  held  seventeen,  and   Saxony,  the   next  highest, four.*  For  any  change  of   the   constitution  a  majority  of   twothirds  was  required.

The  Reichstag  consisted  of   two  hundred  and  ninety-seven members  elected  by   universal  suffrage,  in   the   proportion  of   one for   every  100,000  inhabitants.  It   had   only   the   power  of   voting

*   Prussia's  seventeen  were  assigned  on  the  basis  of   adding  to   her   own original  four  votes,  the  votes  of   the   states  she  had  annexed - Hanover four,   Holstein  three,  Hesse-Cassel  three,  Nassau  two,   Frankfort  one.

on  proposed  changes  of   law   and  on  the   budget.  The  members received  no  pay.

This  organization  thus  consisted  in   a  combination  of   the   old Diet  with  the   Prussian  Constitution,  but   construed,  in   Bismarck's fashion,  as  giving  supreme  power  to   the   King.  The  King   of Prussia,  as   President,  had   not  only   the   military  force,   but   also the   control  of   the   other  powers;  he   convoked  and   dissolved  the Reichstag;  his   chancellor  presided  over  the   Bundesrath.

Everything  suggestive  of   parliamentary  control  had  been avoided.  Bismarck  had  refused  to   institute  a   responsible  federal ministry;  the   chancellor  alone  represented  the   federal  government before   the   Reichstag,  the   other   ministers  of   the   Confederation were  only   his   clerks;   the   decrees  of   the   King-President were  countersigned  by   him   alone.  He   "   took  the   responsibility," said  the   constitution,  but   this   was  only   a  moral  responsibility. The  Reichstag  had  no   hold  on  the   Chancellor  and   consequently none  on   the   government;  it   had   only   the   negative  power  of   refusing to   pass   new   laws. tion

The  two  assemblies  were  of   so   different  origin   that   the   government ran   little   risk   of   finding   them   united  against   it.   On the   contrary,  Bismarck  counted  on  playing  them  off   against  each other:  of   using   the   Bundesrath,  naturally  aristocratic  and  monarchical, to   check  the   democratic  and   parliamentary  claims  of   the elected  body,   and   of   using   the   Reichstag,  the   organ  of   national public   opinion,  to   overcome  the   particularist  tendencies  of   the state  governments.  He   insisted  on  an  assembly  chosen  by   universal suffrage   as   a   bulwark  against   state  feeling.  (This   was the   time   of   enormous  majorities  for   the   Imperial  government  in France,  under  universal  suffrage.)

While  forming  a  confederation,  the   German  states  preserved their  separate  existence  and  organization.  The  powers  were shared  between  the   new  federal  government  and  the   old   local governments.  The  principle  laid  down  by   Bismarck  was  "   to find  the   minimum  of   concession  which  the   several  states  must make  to   the   whole,  in   order  that   it   may   live   "   and   "   to   demand of   the   state  governments  only   those  sacrifices  which  are   indispensable for   the   success  of   a   national  community."

All   the   powers  necessary  for   establishing  national  and  economic unity   were  assigned   to   the   federal  government,  (i)   The military  forces - army  and  navy;  (2)   International  relations, ambassadors,  consuls,  treaties;  (3)   Commerce  and   transportation, customs  duties,  mail  and  telegraph,  money,  weights  and  meas-

ures,  general  regulation  of   railroads,  banking,  passports,  oversight of   aliens;  (4)   sanitary  organization;  (5)   a   part   of   the   legislative power   over  commercial  law,   maritime  law,   criminal  law, and   judicial   procedure.

For  the   federal  expenses  a   federal  budget   was  created.  The revenues  were  of   two  sorts:  (i)   The   revenues  from  customs,  from indirect  taxes  on  consumption,  and   from  the   post   office  and   telegraphs; (2)   The  contributions  paid   by   the   several  states  according to   fixed  proportions  (Matrikel),  to   make  up   any   deficiency. The  government  demanded  that  the  Reichstag  renounce  the right   of   annual  vote   in   the   case  of   the   army  expenses;  the   appropriation was   made   for   a   five-year   period,   at   the   rate  of   225 thalers  for   each   soldier.

The  armies  of   all   the   states  were  organized  on   the   Prussian model:  universal  military  service  for   three  years   in   the   active army  and  four  years   in   the   reserve.  The  Prussian  system  of local  regiments  and   divisions  made  it   possible  to   leave  each  contingent in   its   own  state   (the   Saxon  troops  even   formed  a   separate army  corps),  but   the   whole  force  was  equipped  and  drilled  on the   Prussian  system,  under  the   supervision  of   Prussian  officers. The  new  national  flag  - black,   white,   and   red  - was  the   symbol   of Prussian  hegemony,  her  colors  being   black  and  white.

The  several  states  retained  all   the   other  powers:  justice,   civil rights,   public   worship,  education,  public   works,  together  with their   independent  administrative  and   financial  systems,  their  local legislatures,  and  their  legislative  power.  They   were  no   longer sovereign,  but   they   remained  autonomous,  much  more  independent than  the   Swiss  cantons.

The  whole  arrangement  was  a  compromise  between  national unity   and   traditional  state  independence,  or  rather  between  the King  of   Prussia  and  the   other  princes.  "We  recalled,"  said Bismarck,  "   the   forces  of   resistance  which  wrecked  the   attempts at   Frankfort  and   Erfurt,  and  tried  to   arouse  them  as   little  as possible."  He   had   been  urgent   for   the   speedy   realization  of   a national  system :   "   Let   us  work  quickly,  gentlemen ; let   us   place Germany  in   the   saddle;  she   will   know  how   to   ride."

Transformation  of   the   Parties  (1866-70). - Between  the   two great   wars  of   1866   and   1870   Germany  went  through  a   profound transformation.  The  Confederation  became  a  nation,  and  the struggle  for   and   against   national  unity,   which  dominated  public life,   produced  a   new   formation  of   parties   and   a   change   of   policy on  the   part   of   the   Prussian  government.  The  victory  of   1866

ended  the   constitutional  contest  in   Prussia.  The  Progress  party, which  had   conducted  the   struggle,  was  abandoned  by   the   voters. In   the   House  of   Representatives  elected  in   June,   1866,   it   had barely   seventy  members,  nearly  all   from  the   west  or   from  the province  of   Prussia;  the   Conservatives  rose  in   number  to   nearly a   hundred.  The  question  of   theory  had  not  been  settled,  and even  the   ministry  recognised  the   right   of   the   House  to   vote  the budget,  for   it   asked  for   the   passage  of   an  act   of   indemnity  relieving it   of   the   responsibility  it   had   incurred  in   governing  without a   regular   budget.  But   this   act   of   indemnity,  passed   by   230   votes against  75,   was  a   practical  victory  for   the   government.  The ministry  remained  in   office,   and   the   King   declared  that   he   would do   the   same  thing   again   in   a   similar  case.  A   new  party  was formed  under  the   name  of   "   National  Liberal,"  which  declared its   intention  "   to   sustain  the   government  fully   in   its   foreign policy   "   while  "   maintaining  in   home  matters  the   position  of   a watchful  and  loyal   opposition."

Presently  a   provisional  Reichstag  was  elected  by   the   people   of all   the   states,  to   discuss  the   constitution  (February,  1867).   The majority  of   the   body   consisted  of   Liberals  who   had   come  over  to Bismarck.  Furthermore  it   could  do   little  but   ratify   the   scheme previously  drawn  up   by   the   governments;  it   made  only   some amendments  of   detail.  On   the   points   of   disagreement  between the   majority  and  Bismarck,  it   was  the   majority  that   yielded;  in spite   of   formal  votes  in   favour  of   a   responsible  federal  ministry and  payment  of   the   members  of   the   Reichstag,  neither  proposal was  adopted  in   the   constitution.

At   the   regular  elections  to   the   Reichstag  and   the   Prussian House  of   Representatives,  in   August,  1867,   the   parties   succeeded in   clearing   up   their  issues.

The  National  Liberal  party   drew  to   itself  a  part   of   the   Progressists, some  remnants  of   the   "   Old   Liberals,"  and   some  deputies of   the   liberal  opposition  in   the   annexed  provinces,  Hanover, Hesse,  and  Nassau.  Coalescing  with  the   Liberal  Conservatives detached  from  the   old   Conservative  party,   it   formed  the   government majority.  It   wished  for   a   consolidation  of   Prussia  by   the assimilation  of   the   annexed  provinces,  and  for   a   completion  of the   German  union  by   the   admission  of   the   southern  states  into the   Confederation.  It   accepted,  therefore,  the   leadership  of   Bismarck, and   confined  itself   to   asking   him   for   certain  liberal  reforms :   the   reform  of   the   local   institutions  by   the   abolition  of   the remaining  powers  of   the  nobles;  the  reform  of   the   primary

## 478  ESTABLISHMENT  OF  GERMAN    UNITY.

schools  by   withdrawing  them  from  the   power  of   the   clergy;   the reform  of   the   Prussian  electoral  system  by   the   introduction  of simple   universal  suffrage.  It   wished  also   for   some  economic  reforms, especially   freedom  of   industry   and   commerce.  It   was  a party  of   middle-class  imperialists,  opposed  to  the  influences which  had  till   then  dominated  Prussian  life  - the   nobles,  the clergy,   and   the   official  class.  Its   chief   strength  lay   in   the   centre of   the   old   kingdom  and   in   the   annexed  provinces.  Its   leader, Bennigsen,  was  the   leader  of   the   former  Liberal  opposition  in Hanover.  The  manufacturers,  the  merchants,  and  the  university professors  belonged  to   it;   it   included  many   Jews.

The  Free  Conservatives,  of   whom  there  were  forty   in   the Reichstag  of   1867,   were  large   land-proprietors  of   the   central provinces,  and  Silesia,  stalwart  ministerialists,  ready   to   vote  for all   measures  proposed  by   the   government.

The  bulk  of   the   Conservative  party,  calling   themselves  German Conservatives  in   the   Reichstag,  were  the   old   aristocratic party  of   the   Kreuzzeiiung,  which  had  supported  Bismarck  and the   King   in   the   constitutional  conflict.  Its   strength  lay   chiefly among  the   great   landowners  of   the   eastern  provinces.  It   sought to   maintain  the   power  of   the   nobles  and   clergy.  Its   stronghold was  in   the   Prussian  Parliament,  where  it   constituted  almost  the whole  House  of   Lords  and  had  a  strong  minority  in   the   Lower House.  Its  opponents  accused  it   of   devotion  to  exclusively Prussian  interests.

The  Progress  party,  greatly  weakened  by   the   triumph  of   its adversary  Bismarck,  dwindled  to   twenty  members  in   the   Reichstag; only   the   large   cities   and   a   part   of   Schleswig-Holstein  remained faithful   to   it.   It   continued  the   liberal  opposition,  while accepting  the   policy   of   union.

From  this  time  new  parties  of   radical  opposition  appeared. In   the   new  provinces  these  were  parties  of   protest  against  the annexation.  In   Schleswig  the  Danes  demanded  the  popular vote  promised  in   the   treaty  of   Prague;  there  were  two  of   them in   the   provisional  Reichstag;  the   government,  by   a   new  districting, reduced  them  to   one   in   the   regular   Reichstag  and   two   in the   Prussian  Parliament.

In   Hanover  the   Guelph   party,  seven  in   the   Reichstag  and   three in   the   Prussian  Parliament,  was  a   coalition  between  the   partisans of   the   expelled   King   and   patriots   who   disliked  the   Prussian  system. In   the   old   Prussian  province  of   Posen,  which  belonged  to the   Prussian  Kingdom  but   had  remained  outside  of   the   German

Cor 'onfederation,  the   Polish  deputies  protested  against   the   incorporation of   the   Grand  Duchy  of   Posen  into  the   North  German Confederation,  as  contrary  to   the   treaties ;   also   "   against   every  act designed  to   give   the   Poles  of   Prussia  a   German  character  and destroy  their  national  existence."  The  Polish  party,  counting  13 in   the   Reichstag,  a   score  in   the   Prussian  Parliament,  was  made up   of   Catholic  nobles.

By   the   side   of   these  parties   of   protest  on  nationalist  grounds a  party  of   protest  on  social  grounds  appeared - the   Socialists. As   early   as  1848,   Socialists  of   the   French  type   were  found  in Germany.  But  the   party,   dispersed  by   persecutions,  did   not  reappear until   1863,   when   it   got   a   footing  among  the   labourers  of the   eastern  provinces  of   Prussia.  It   was   formed  by   the   activity of   a   Jewish   orator,   Lassalle,  a   Socialist  of   1848,   who   held  doctrines borrowed  from  the   old   French  Socialists,  together  with Louis  Blanc's  "   national  workshops,"  managed  by   labourers,  at the   cost  of   the   state.  He   revived  the   old   French  name  of   "   Social-Democrat," making   it   the   title   of   his   journal,   founded  in 1865.  It   was  a  time  of   struggle.  Lassalle,  opposing  the middle-class  Progressists,  had  relations  with  Bismarck,  who  was later  reproached  with  having  encouraged  the  Socialists.  The party  at   first   got   its   recruits  among  the   co-operative  societies founded  by   Schulze-Delitsch,  a   liberal.  With  the   introduction of   universal  suffrage,  it   entered  the   political   field.  Lassalle,  who was  killed  in   a   duel  in   1864,   left   the   party   organized  under  a monarchical  dictatorship.  His  second  successor,  Schweitzer, was  elected  to   the   Reichstag  of   1867.

In   opposition  to  this  Prussian  Socialist  party  of   Lassalle's disciples,  there  was  formed  an   International  party  under  Marx. This  had  its   strongholds  at   first   outside  of   Prussia - in   Saxony, among  the   "   educational  societies  for   workingmen  "   (Arbeiterbildungsvereine)  organized  by   the   middle-class  Progressists.  Their founder  was  Liebknecht,  a  revolutionary  journalist  of   1848,   who had  fled   to   London,  where  he   became  a   disciple  of   Marx.  He converted  the   favourite  orator  of   the   Saxon  labourers,  Bebel,  a lathe-worker  and  Catholic  democrat,  who,  in   1867-68,  went over  to   socialism  with  his   associates.  The  meeting  of   "   educational societies  "   at   Nuremburg  in   1868  declared  in   favour  of   the International  by   a   two-thirds  vote.  Later  the   "   Social  Democratic Workingman's  party   "   was   founded  (1869).  Its   program, drawn  up   at   Eisenach,  combined  the   demands  of   the   Swiss  radical party   with   the   economic  doctrines  of   Marx.*  Its   two

leaders,  Liebknecht  and  Bebel,  sat   in   the   Reichstag  as  early   as 1867.

The  two  socialist  parties,  after  abortive  negotiations  in   186869,   remained  in   a  position  of   rivalry   till   1874.

In   presence  of   the   new  condition  of   parties,   Bismarck  modified his   policy.   He   ceased  to   lean   exclusively  on   the   Conservatives and   gradually   made  approaches  to   the   National  Liberals. In   Prussia  he   retained  the   ministry  of   the   conflict  time,   although the  Liberal  majority  of   the   Prussian  Lower  House  protested against  the   minister  of   education,  Miihler,  who   advocated  clerical control  of   the   schools.  Not  till   December,  1869,   did   he   admit two  National  Liberals  as  colleagues.  But   as  early   as  1868  the Conservatives  of   the   Prussian  Lower  House,  having   refused  him the   creation  of   a   provincial  debt   for   Hanover  (even   after   a   threat of   resignation,  he   carried  it   only   by   a   majority  of   198   against 192),   he   began   to   make  terms  with  the   National  Liberals  by accepting  their  administrative  and  economic  reforms.  The  reform of   the   local   institutions  dragged   till   1872;   but   the   economic reforms  proceeded  rapidly  (1868-69),  especially  those  in   the   federal domain:  repeal   of   usury   laws,   abolition  of   restrictions  on business  enterprises  (1867),  freedom  of   marriage  (1868),   freedom of   industry,  abolition  of   imprisonment  for   debt,   removal  of   restrictions on   labour  unions.  Later  the  Supreme  Tribunal  of Commerce  was  organized  and  the   new  penal   code  adopted.

In   those  practical  reforms  Bismarck  was  in   agreement  with the   National  Liberals.  But  he   continued  to   reject   with  disdain and   mockery  their  demands  for   a   responsible  ministry  and   payment of   Representatives.

These  measures  of   reorganization  seem  to   have  made  many opponents,  especially  among  the   peoples  who,   up   to   that  time, had   been  outside  the   Prussian  system.  The  Prussian  universal military  service,  introduced  at   a  stroke,  seemed  too  severe.  It brought  new  expenses  and  caused  deficits  in   all   the   states,  even in   Prussia  itself,   and   compelled  an   increase  of   the   taxes.  The new  system  of   economic  freedom  disturbed  the   old   ways  of   the great   landowners  and  artisans.

Of   the   annexed  countries  it   was  Hanover  which  gave  most emphatic  signs   of   hostility.  The  King   of   Hanover  rejected  the money  indemnity  offered  to   him  by   the  Prussian  government (the   other  dispossessed  sovereigns  accepted  it).   He   demanded the   restoration  of   his   kingdom,  negotiated  with  the   enemies  of

*   For   the   programs  of   the   various  Socialist  parties,  see  chap.   xxiv.

Prussia,  and   formed  in   France  the   Guelph  Legion,  consisting  of Hanoverian  volunteers.  Bismarck  took  advantage  of   this  to sequestrate  the   Hanoverian  indemnity  (the   Guelph  Fund)  and to   get   authority  to   use  the   interest.  He   used   it   at   first   in   paying a   secret  police   to   watch  the   Guelph   agents - the   thing   he   called "   following  the   reptiles   into   their   holes  in   order  to   find   out  what they   are   doing"  (1868).  But  little  by   little  the   "reptile  fund," as   it   was  then   called,   came  to   be   used   in   bribing   German  newspapers, and   the   name   "   reptile   press   "   was  applied   to   the   ministerial journals.

Southern  Germany. - In  southern  Germany  the  four  independent states   continued  to   be   torn   by   two  contradictory  policies. Already  united  to   Prussia  by   the   Zollverein  and   the   treaties  of alliance  of   1866,   they   could  not   keep   themselves  entirely  independent of   the   Northern  Confederation.  The  Grand  Duke  and legislature  of   Baden  would  have  been  willing  to   join   it;   they held   aloof  from  fear   of   European  complications.  But   in   the   two kingdoms,  Bavaria  and  Wurtemburg,  there  was  no   desire  for   a closer  union  with  the   North;  the   governments  from  attachment to   their   independent  sovereignty,  the   people   from  aversion  to   the Prussians  and  their  military  service,  preferred  to  stand  aloof. The  governments  would  not  even  have  the   Southern  Confederation dreamed  of   by   Napoleon  III.,   for   fear   of   being   drawn  into union  with  northern  Germany.

The  southern  states,  therefore,  remained  isolated.  Bismarck tried  to   attract  them  by   means  of   the   Zollverein.  He   arranged that   the   customs  tariff,   instead  of   being   established  by   treaties between  the   governments,  should  be   voted  in   the   form  of   a   law   by a   Customs'  Parliament,  consisting  of   the   North  German  Reichstag with   the   addition  of   deputies   elected  by   universal  suffrage in   the   southern  states  (1868).  But   the   enemies  of   Prussia  had the   upper   hand  in   the   south,   the   democratic  party   in   Wurtemburg and   the   Catholic  party   in   Bavaria;  the   National  Liberals had  a  majority  in   Baden  only.   Of   85   members  elected  to   the Customs  Parliament  only   24   were  in   favour  of   union  with  the north;  46   were   hostile  to   Prussia;  the   rest   followed  their   governments. In   combination  with  the  Conservatives  and  professed opponents  of   Bismarck  in   the  north,  they   formed  a  majority against  union.  The  Customs'  Parliament  rejected  an  address  in favour  of   union,   by   186   to   150,   and   then   refused  to   impose   a   tax on  petroleum  (1868).  It   lasted  till   1870,   but   confined  its   action to   matters  connected  with  the   customs  duties.

## 482  ESTABLISHMENT  OF  GERMAN   UNITY.

In   southern  Germany  the   opposition  to   Prussia  increased.  In Wurtemburg  the  democratic  majority  proposed  the   Swiss  military system   (1868),   and   later   a   reduction  of   the   military   expenses; the   ministry  resigned.  In   Bavaria  a   dissolution  of   the   legislature resulted  in   a   re-election  of   the   Catholic  (Patriot)  majority, which  forced  the  King   to   dismiss  his   ministry  and  demanded a   reduction  of   the   military  service  to   eight   months.  Even  in Baden  the   National  party   was  weakening  in   its   resistance  to   the ministers.

Foundation  of   the   Empire  (1870-71). - At   the   beginning  of 1870   German  unity   seemed  farther  off   than  in   1866.  The  war with  France  brought  a   great   change.  'All   the   states  of   Germany went  heartily  with  the   Confederation.  Then  the   great  victories won  in   common  created  a  strong   feeling   of   German  unity.

Before  the   end   of   the   war,   during   the   siege   of   Paris,   the   princes of   the   southern  states  offered  to   join   the   Confederation,  and   on the   suggestion  of   the   King   of   Bavaria  it   was   decided  to   revive the   old   historical  names  of   Reich  and   Kaiser - Empire  and   Emperor. This   was  only   an  extension  of   territory   and   a   change   of name.  There  was  no  new  constitution.  By   separate  treaties between  the   Confederation  and  the   four  southern  states,  these were  admitted  to   the   existing  union,   under  its   new  name  of   German Empire;   the   two   larger   states  obtained  some  special   conditions- even   in   military   matters.  Bavaria  retained  her   independent postal   system   and   her   own  military   uniform.

The  Empire  was  inaugurated  by   a  ceremony  in   which  the princes  alone  took  part.   The   King   of   Prussia  was  crowned  Emperor at   Versailles  in   presence  of   the   German  sovereigns  in   January, 1871.   At   that   time   the   treaties  between  the   governments had  been  presented  to  the  parliaments  of   the  four  southern states  affected.  lln   Bavaria  the   Patriot  anti-Prussian  majority divided:  one  part   joined   the   national  liberal  minority,  thus  forming a   two-thirds  majority,  102  to   48;   the   other  part,   consisting  of the   deputies  of   the   most  intensely  Catholic  rural  districts,  entered a   protest   in   the   name  of   Bavarian  independence,  January,  1871. The  other  three  southern  states  had   ratified  the   conventions  in 1870   with  almost  no  opposition.  In   ratifying  the   treaties  between the   governments,  the   Reichstag,  in   April,   1871,   transformed them   officially   into   the   Constitution  of   the   Empire.

The  territory  taken  from  France  was  annexed,  not  to   Prussia, as   the   National  Liberals  demanded,  but   to   the   Empire.  It   became the   "   Imperial  Province  "   (Reichsland)  Alsace-Lorraine,  and

was  placed  in   an  exceptional  relation  with  the  government. Having  become  a  member  of   the   Confederation,  not  by   agreement but   by   conquest,  it   received  no  autonomous  government and  no   delegates  to  the   Federal  Council;  it   was  put   directly under  the   power  of   the   Imperial  government;  that  is,   it   was actually  governed  by   the   Chancellor,  with  the   assistance  of   a special  bureau.  'As   in   1866,   the   country  was  annexed  without consulting  the   inhabitants.

The  Empire  thus  constituted  was  unlike  any  preceding  form of   government.  Theorists  in   public  law  found  it   difficult  to define.  It   was  a   federated  state  formed  of   small  autonomous monarchies,  but  subject  to  a   higher  sovereign,  a   federation (Bund)  that  had   become  an   Empire  (Reich)  without  ceasing  to be   a   federation.  The   official  document  reads :   "   This  Bund  shall bear  the   name  of   Reich."  The  federation  had  no   federal  government outside   of   and   superior  to   all   the   federated  governments. One  of   its   members,  the   King   of   Prussia,  supported  by   irresistible military   power  and   invested  with   the   higher   dignity   of   Emperor, commanded  all   the   others  as  a   superior;  the   princes   were no   longer   his   equals,   but   his   subjects.

The  individual  states  became  subordinate  to  the   Empire,  not only   in   affairs  common  to   all,   such   as   foreign,   military,   and   commercial affairs,   but   submitted  in   their   own   local   concerns  to   the laws  that   should  be   adopted  by   the   Imperial  government.  They were  bound  by   perpetual  treaties,  but   with  no  guarantees  for   the future.  No   limit  was  set  to   the   power  of   the   federal  government to   amend  the   constitution;  it   could  change   the   organization  by laws  of   such  a   kind  as   to   restrict  indefinitely  the   autonomous rights   of   the   states  ; it   could  even  transform  the   Empire  and   deprive it   of   its   federal  character,  on   the   sole   condition  of   getting two-thirds  majority  in   the   Federal  Council.  Even  the   special rights   reserved  to   some  of   the   states  by   treaty   can   be   relinquished by   the   government  of   the   state  without  the   consent  of   the legislature.

The  federal  government  itself  has   been  so  constructed  as   to give   the   Emperor  the   same  preponderating  power   in   the   Empire as   he   had   in   Prussia  as   King.   No   decision  can   be   made  in   opposition to   him.  He  governs  by   his   own  sovereign  power,  as in   a   constitutional  monarchy,  through  his   chancellor,  who  depends on   him   alone,   and   is   beyond   the   reach  of   the   elected assembly  of   the   nation.  The  sovereignty  belongs,  not  to   the German  people,  but   to   the   Emperor  and   the   Federal  Council.

## 484  ESTABLISHMENT  OF  GERMAN   UNITY.

The  "   fundamental  rights   "   of   the   individual,  expressly  guaranteed in   1848,   were  not  mentioned  in   1871.   The   "   Constitution of   the   German  Empire   "   is   only   a   practical  regulation  of   powers  ; like   Bismarck,  the   founder  of   the   Empire,  it   is   matter-of-fact.

The  empire  is   not  even  established  precisely  on  the   lines  of nationality.  It   is   the   territory  of   the   Kingdom  of   Prussia,  enlarged by   states  that   entered  the   Zollverein  and   by   districts  conquered by   Prussia.  It   does  not  even  include  the   whole  German nation :   the   Austrian  Germans  are  outside  of   it.   It   does   include the   alien  populations  annexed  by   conquest  and   still   protesting against  the   connection:  the   Poles  of   Posen  and  Prussia,  the Danes  of   Schleswig,  and   the   French  of   Alsace-Lorraine.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.*

BIBLIOGRAPHY.- See  Waitz,  "   Quellenkunde,"  1894   edit.

For  practical  use  all   important  documents  and  a   detailed  story   of   events may   be   found  in   Schulthess,  "Europ.  Geschichtskalender,"  i   vol.  a  year since  1860. - The  principal  political  reviews  for   this   period   are   the   "   Grenzboten  "   and   the   "   Preussische  Jahrbiicher."

DOCUMENTS.- The  principal  collections  are  :   Reports  of   the  Chambers ;   "   Die   Innere  Politik  der   Preussischen  Regierung,"  1866,  collection of   government  acts  during  the  constitutional  conflict. - L.   Hahn,  "Fiirst Bismarck,"  5   vols.,  1878-91;  collection  of   all   Bismarck's  speeches  and declarations.- H.-KoW,  "   Die  Politischen  Reden  des  Fiirsten  Bismarck,"  9 vols.,   1892-94.  There  is   a   French  edition  of   Bismarck's  speeches.

WORKS.- Of  the  endless  German  books  it   is   difficult  to   make  a  selection. An   outline  will   be   found  in   von   Sybel,   "   Die  Begriindung  des Deutschen  Reiches,"  4th   edit.,  7   vols.,  1893-94,  imperialist,  semi-official, not  enough  references. - Oncken,  "   Zeitalter  Wilhelms  I.,"   vol.  i.,   1890 (Oncken  coll.),   a   scientific  popular  work.

In   French  :   E.   Simon,   "   L'Empereur  Guillaume,"  1886  ; "   Hist,   du   Prince de   Bismarck."

FOR  INSTITUTIONS:  Eoenne,  (see   chap,   xiv.)   and   Laband,  ' '   Das  Staatsrecht des   Deutschen  Reiches,"  3   vols.,  1876-82. - Mohl,   "   Das  Deutsche  Reichsstaatsrecht."

*   On   the   character  of   this   bibliog.   see  chap.   xii.

## CHAPTER  XVI.

THE   GERMAN   EMPIRE.

Parties  in   the   Empire. - The   union  of   all   the   states  into   one Empire  completed  the  political  transformation  begun  in   1866. The  Reichstag,  established  above  the   legislatures  of   the   individual states,   attracted  the   greater  part   of   political   activity,   and   the parties   were  formed  on  questions  of   national  policy.

The  grouping  continued  to   be   nearly   the   same  as   in   the   North German  Confederation,  but  the   proportions  were  different.  As was  the   case   before  1870,   the   Reichstag  continued  to   be   divided into   ten  or  more  parties   of   which  no  one   has   ever   had   a   majority by   itself.  'It   is   difficult  to   classify   them  according  to   their   attitude toward  the   government,  for   several  of   them  have  changed their  attitude  according  to   the   government's  policy.  Nevertheless, a   distinction  may   be   made  between  the   parties   of   systematic opposition,  hostile  to   the   very  constitution  of   the   Empire,  and the   parties   of   intermittent  opposition  under  the   constitution.

The  systematic  opposition  consisted  of   groups  of   very   different character.  There  were  three  parties  of   national  protest,  formed by   the   deputies  of   the   non-German  peoples   at   the   three  extremities of   the   Empire:  the   Schleswig  Danes,  one   deputy;  the   Poles of   Posen  and   Prussia,  varying  in   number  from  13   to   19,   according to   the   result   of   the   elections  in   the   districts  of   mixed  nationality, an   aristocratic  and   Catholic  party   won  over  since  1890;   the Alsace- Lorrainers,  since  1874,   represented  by   15   deputies,  a democratic  party,   for   the   greater  part   Catholic.  All   three  protested against   the   incorporation  of   their   country   in   the   Empire. There  was  a   party   of   dynastic  protest,  the   Guelphs  of   Hanover, hostile  to   Prussia;  the   permanent  nucleus  of   the   party   was  composed of   the   partisans   of   the   nobles  and   of   the   Lutheran  clergy, who  remained  faithful  to  the   legitimate  King.  Around  these have  gathered  voters  dissatisfied  with  the   Prussian  government, so   that   the   membership  of   the   party   has   increased  from   four   to eleven  deputies.

The  party  of   social  protest,  at   first   divided  into   two  wings,   was

united  after  the   elections  of   1874   into   one  party,  the   Socialist Workingman's  party,  organized  at   Gotha  in   1875.  It   was  a radical  party   systematically  opposed  to   monarchical  government, to   the   social  system,  to   the   influence  of   the   clergy ;   and   although it   was  not  allowed  to   take  the   name  of   republican,  it   openly declared  itself  hostile  to   the   whole  monarchical  system.  At   first the   elections  and   the   Reichstag  were  for   the   Socialists  merely a   means  for   spreading  their  doctrines;  they   put   forward  candidates, even   in   places   where  they   knew  they   had   no  chance  of electing  them,  in   order  to   gather   partisans  on  all   sides.  They cared  more  for   the   whole  number  of   votes  given   to   these  candi-. dates  throughout  the   Empire  than  for   the   number  of   deputies they   elected.  In   the   Reichstag  the   party   abstained  from  taking part   in   ordinary  business,  but   were  always   on   the   watch  for   opportunities to  attack  existing  institutions  and  always  voted against  the   government.  Only   after  1890   it   began   to   take  a positive   part   in   the   labours  of   the   Reichstag.  Since  the   fusion  of 1875   it   nas  retained  its   former  leaders  of   the   Marx  section,  Liebknecht  and   Bebel.  It   has   its   strongholds  in   the   large   cities  and the   manufacturing  districts,  in   the   Prussian  provinces  of   the Rhine,  of   Saxony,  and   of   Silesia,  in   Berlin  and   Hamburg,  and in   the   Kingdom  of   Saxony.  The  number  of   voters  belonging to   it   has   risen   in   almost  constant  progression  from  300,000  to 1,700,000;  the   number  of   deputies  has   varied  between  2   and   44. (At   the   elections  of   1898   the   number  of   voters  was  2,120,000  out of   a   total  of   7,600,000,  and  the   number  of   socialist  deputies elected  was  56.)

The  remaining  parties  have  accepted  the   Empire  and  its   constitution; they   are  classified  according  to   the   direction  which  they try   to   give   to   the   government.  The  chief  questions  on  which they   are   divided  relate  to   the   matters  directly   submitted  to   the Reichstag;  the   federal  budget,  the   army,  the   customs  and   indirect taxes,   the   relations  between  ministers  and   Reichstag,  questions of   law   and   of   legal   procedure.  But   they   do   not   limit   themselves strictly   to   these   matters.  They   form  combinations  with the   parties   in   the   Prussian  Parliament  that   have  formed  around questions  of   the   Church  and  the   schools.  Almost  all   of   them originated  and   have  their  chief  power   in   Prussia.

The   Conservative  party   (Deutschconservativ)  was  a   continuation of   the   old   aristocratic  and   orthodox  Protestant  party   of   Prussia. Like  the   original  it   had   its   strength  in   the   farming  regions   of eastern  Prussia,  was  made  up   of   great   landowning  nobles,  and

had   the   same  organ,  the   Kreuzzeitwng.  Its   aims  were  to   preserve the   established  institutions - the   power  of   the   King,   the   organization of   the   army,  the   authority  of   the   aristocracy  over  the peasants,  and  of   the   clergy   over  the   schools.  Without  openly combatting  the  new  constitution  of   the  Empire,  it   protested against  the   tendency  of   the   Liberals  to   "   absorb  Prussia  into Germany  " ;   it   sought  to   prevent  the   assimilation  in   order  to maintain  the   special   system  of   aristocratic  old   eastern  Prussia. It   was  regarded  as  a   Prussian  particukrist  party,   hostile  to   the national  unity,   and   it   had,   in   fact,   few   supporters  outside  of Prussia.  By   sustaining  the   King   and  his   ministry  in   the   conflict period   it   had  acquired  a  strong  influence  over  King   William; it   remained  the   party  of   the   court  and   the   nobility.  It   was undisputed  master  of   the  Prussian  House  of   Lords.  In   the Reichstag  it   had   a   very  variable  number  of   deputies, - from  21 to   76,  - according  as   it   supported  or  opposed  the   ministry.

The  Conservative-Liberal  or   Imperial  party  (Reichspartei), made  up   of   large   manufacturers,  great   landowners  (especially  in Silesia),  and   office-holders,  always   supported  the   ministry  and became  liberal  when  Bismarck  adopted  a   liberal  policy  (see p.   494).

The  National-Liberal  party,   drawing  support  from  all   parts of   the   Empire,   remained  what   it   had   been   from   its   birth,   a   middleclass  imperialist  anti-clerical  party.  Its   program  was  to   support Bismarck  in   giving  the   Empire  a  strong  organization  and  to obtain  from  him  in   return  a   constitutional  system  with  free   trade and  anti-clerical  tendencies.  It   demanded  a  responsible  ministry for   the   Empire,   payment  of   the   people's   representatives,  complete freedom  of   industry   and   commerce,  including  free   trade  and a   reduction  of   the   excise  taxes  on  consumption.  In   Prussia  it demanded  freedom  of   the   press,  a   reform  of   local  administration that  should  abolish  the   authority  of   the   nobles  over  the   peasantry, and   a   reform  of   the   school  system   that   should  take   away the   clerical  control  of   education.

The  party  of   Progress  (Forts chritt;   since  1884   Freisinnig)  has always  preserved  its   original   program.  It   was,   like   the   NationalLiberals,  a  middle-class  party  of   anti-clerical  tendencies,  but   it was  an  opposition  party,   hostile  to   the   military  system  and   to the   bureaucratic  method  of   administration.  It   demanded  a  reduction of   the   period   of   service  and   of   the   expenses  of   the   army, and  it   leaned  toward  a   parliamentary  government.  It   professed the   doctrine  of   the   English   Manchester  school  as   to   the   advan-

tages   of   free   trade.  When  the   National  Liberal  party   abandoned this   doctrine  to   follow  Bismarck's  evolution,  a   "   secession  "   of free-traders  left   it   (1881)   and   eventually  joined   the   Freisinnige. This  party   drew  its   strength  chiefly   from  the   large   cities,   from Holstein,  Hesse,  the   province  of   Prussia,  and  the   Kingdom  of Saxony.

The  Democratic  party   (Volkspartei),  peculiar  to   South  Germany and   especially  to   Wurtemburg,  was  radical,  anti-clerical, and  anti-Prussian.  Greatly  weakened  by   the  founding  of   the Empire,  it   seems  to   have  gathered  strength  since  1890   by   its   opposition to   the   ecclesiastical  policy   of   the   government.

The  Centre  was  the   Catholic  party,   formed  at   first   in   Prussia. There  had  always  been  in   the  Prussian  Parliament  a  small "   Catholic  group,"  but   nearly   blended  with  the   Conservatives. After  the   Vatican  Council  and  the   capture  of   Rome  by   Italy, a   completely  separate  party  was  organized  in   the   parliament  of 1870,   formed  exclusively  of   Catholics,  of   whom  there  were  fiftysix.  It   presented  itself  as  a   conservative  monarchical  party   with Catholic  tendencies.  Its   first  formal  act  was  an  address  to   the King  asking  him  to   help   the   Pope   in   recovering  his   temporal power  (February,  1871).  The  party   immediately  began   activity in   the   Reichstag  of   1871,   taking   there  also   the   name  of   Centre. Its   published  program  demanded  only   the   maintenance  of   the federal  character  of   the   Empire  and  the   liberty   of   the   Church. But   it   was  then   and   has   remained  a   purely   Catholic  party,   found nowhere  outside  of   the   Catholic  districts  of   Prussia,  Bavaria,  and Baden.  It   has   had   no  other  policy   than  to   defend  the   Catholic religion  and   the   Holy   See,   to   maintain  or   increase  the   power of   the   clergy   and   to   resist  the   secularizing  parties.  It   is   a   conservative Catholic   party;   but,   by   a   natural  dislike  of   the   Protestant government  of   the   Empire,  it   has,   on  the   federal  side,   assumed the   character  of   an  opposition.  Recruited  in   part   from  the   democratic population  of   the   west,   it   has   retained  a   popular   following which  has   kept   it   in   touch  with   the   democratic  parties.

Conditions  of   Political  Life. - In   order  to   understand  the   tactics of   these   German  parties,  it   is   necessary  to   bear   in   mind  the   constitutional arrangements  of   Germany.

The  Empire,  created  in   the   likeness  of   Prussia,  is   a   strictly constitutional  monarchy,  like  France  under  Louis  XVIII.  The Emperor  and   his   Chancellor  in   Germany,  the   King   and   his   ministers in   Prussia,  exercise  the   sovereign  powers  of   government through  subordinates  who  depend  on  them  alone.  The  repre-

sentatives  of   the   people   have  no  means  of   coercing  the   government, not   even  an   independent  power  of   legislation.  The Reichstag  has   indeed  the   right   of   proposing  changes  of   law;   on the   request  of   15   members  it   can   discuss  and   pass  any   bill:   but   no bill   becomes  a   law   without  the   consent  of   the   Emperor  and   the princes  of   the   Federal  Council.  Practically  the   power  of   the elected  assembly  is   purely   negative;  it   consists  in   the   right   of refusing  to   adopt   new  laws  and  new  taxes  desired  by   the   government.

Practically  the   directing  power   lay   with  Bismarck,  Chancellor of   the   Empire   and   President  of   the   Prussian  ministry,*  the   confidential adviser   of   the   sovereign  till   1890,   a   man  who,   in   accordance with   his   doctrine  of   1862,   systematically  prevented  Germany from  developing  toward  parliamentary  government.  Accustomed to   be   obeyed,  he   would  endure  no  control  on  the   part   of the   people's  representatives,  nor  even  a  partial  divergence  of opinion  on  the   part   of   his   colleagues  and   his   supporters  in   the legislative  bodies.  He   even  refused  to  permit  the   organization of   a   regular   Imperial   ministry;  he   reduced  the   federal  government to   a   bureau  of   the   Chancellor,  composed  of   certain  officials  taking over  work   prepared  for   them  by   the   Prussian  ministry.  Germany, like   Prussia,   has   lived   under  a   liberal  bureaucratic  system, under  the   personal  government  of   the   Emperor  and   his   Chancellor. Political  life   has   been   dominated  by   Bismarck's  views, then  by   those  of   William  II.,   and   by   their  attitude  toward  the political  parties.

This  government,  master  of   the   whole  administration,  needed to   ask   the   Reichstag  only   for   new  taxes  and   occasionally  for   a piece   of   legislation,  usually   of   the   repressive  sort.  The   parties, conscious  of   having   no  other  means  of   action,  adopted  defensive tactics,  opposing  a   passive  resistance  to   the   government,  yielding to   it   one  step   at   a   time   when   they   ran  any   risk   of   not   being upheld  in   resistance  by   the   voters,   bargaining  with  it   to   induce it   to   abate   its   demands  as   much  as  possible,  avoiding  appropriations for   long   terms  of   years,  and   all   legislation  that   would  leave the   Reichstag  disarmed  for   the   future,  endeavouring  to   get   concessions in   return  for   their  votes.

The  government  itself  having,  unlike  parliamentary  ministries, no   need   of   a   stable   majority   in   order   to   govern,   took   advantage of   the   medley  of   parties   to   get   a   coalition,  from   time   to

*   The  experiment  of   a   President  of   the   Prussian  Ministry  distinct  from the   Chancellor  of   the   Empire  (1873)   was  not   testing.

490

time,   sufficient  for   the   day   of   the   vote.  Among   the   parties   accepting the   constitution  (Conservative,  National-Liberal,  Centre, Progress)  it   selected  those  it   could  win   over  to   its   policy   most cheaply,  and  made  such  concessions  to   their  several  programs as  were  necessary  in   order  to   obtain  their  votes.  Later,  as   its own  policy  changed,  it   turned  to  a  new  combination.  As   is natural  in   a   monarchical  country  administered  by   powerful  officials, each   party,   during   its   temporary  alliance  with   the   government, has   been   more  numerous  than   when  in   opposition.  This fluctuation  has   been  most  marked  in   the   most  ministerial  parties : the   Conservative,  which  has   varied  from  21  to   80;   the   Reichspartei   from  57   to   21;   the   National-Liberal  from  152   in   1874   to 50   in   1884,   then   from   99   in   1887   to   42   in   1890.

The  following  table  shows  approximately  the   strength  of   each party   in   the   Reichstag  since  the   founding  of   the   Empire.  The deputies  not  attached  to   any   party,  the   so-called  "   Savages,"  are not   included. 1877 1884  1887 1893 27 65 67

27

23

1874

25

24

1898

70

32

|                                                                                                                                     | 1871            |                               | 127                  | 1878                       | 1881                              |                       |                       | 1890                      | 13                      | 19                             |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------|-------------------------------|----------------------|----------------------------|-----------------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|---------------------------|-------------------------|--------------------------------|
| Conservatives National Liberals Progress People's Party . Socialists Centre Guelphs .... Poles Alsace-Lorrainers Danes Anti-Semites | 39 1 20 2 2 4 i | 56 46 63 14 21 152 49 i 9 4 i | 36 14 15 3 12 5 10 i | 40 38 14 59 57 3 9 94 10 i | 36 14 15 43 61 9 12 97 10 18 15 I | 98 28 7 9 100 ii 16 i | 5i 50 13 80 99 ii 4 i | 76 21 10 107 II 16 10 i 4 | 4i 15 ii 44 99 7 8 i 18 | 7i 70 53 21 43 8 103 9 10 i 12 |

42

91 92 98 The  German  Empire  must  not  be   conceived  as  a  centralized state  in   which  the   whole  political  life   is   centred  in   the   Imperial government  and  the   Reichstag.  Neither  in   Prussia  nor  in   the smaller  states  has   the   local  legislature  fallen  to   the   level  of   a provincial  council;  it   has   continued  to   be   a  political  assembly, discussing  vital  questions  of   education,  the   Church,  taxation,  etc.; and  the   division  of   parties   in   it   has   continued  to   be   a   living question.

52

Prussia's  victories  in   war   increased  everywhere  the   party   favouring German  unity   under  Prussian  leadership - the   NationalLiberal  party.  It   has   prevailed  in   Baden  and   Hesse  over  the

Catholic  party.  In   Wurtemburg  it   allied  itself  with  the   ministers against   the   anti-military  and   anti-Prussian  Democrats.  In Bavaria  it   formed  the   nucleus  of   the   Liberal  party,   which  has   its strength  in   the   Rhenish  Palatinate  and  among  the  Franconian Protestants,  and   which  supports  the   ministers  against   the   Catholic majority.  Thanks  to   the   Bavarian  system,  it   nearly   equals in   the   legislature  the   Patriot  (Catholic)  party,  which  has   on   its side  the   great  majority  of   the   voters.  In   Saxony  it   nearly equalled  the  old   Conservative  Lutheran  party  up   to  the   time when  the   two   joined   hands  against   the   Socialists,  who  were  beginning to   carry   seats   in   the   Legislature.  In   Mecklenburg, where  as  early   as  1871   it   had   an  enormous  majority  of   the   voters, it   has   been   held   in   check  by   the   deputies   of   the   nobles  (the   Ritterschaft),  who  control  the  "   Estates,"  which  are  still  organized in   the   eighteenth  century  fashion.  Several  times  the   Reichstag has   protested  against   these  old   "   estates  "   as  contrary  to   the   constitution of   the   Empire;  but   the   efforts  for   reform  made  by   the Grand  Duke  have  been  nullified  by   the   resistance  of   the   nobles. Among  the  small  states  the   voters  are  usually  divided  between the   National-Liberals  and  the   Progressives.

Like  Prussia  and  the   Empire,  the   German  states  are  governed by   sovereigns,  ministers,  and   officials.  The   government  is   sometimes liberal,   but   never  parliamentary.  The   legislature  has   only a   negative  power;   it   can  worry  the   ministers,  but   cannot  compel them  to  resign;  in   Bavaria  the   Lutz  ministry  has   maintained itself   continuously  in   office,   in   spite   of   the   Catholic  majority.  All Germany  still  lives  under  bureaucratic  monarchies.

The   Culturkampf  and   the   Organization  of   the   Empire   (1871-77). - During  the  first  years  of   the   new  Empire,  Bismarck,  going on   in   his   evolution  of   1867,   allied  himself  with  the   NationalLiberal  party   in   order  to   establish  the   institutions  necessary  to national  unity.  His  chief  opponents  in   those  years  were  the Catholic  Centre.

The  Prussian  Constitution  of   1850,   based  on   the   model  of   the Belgian  Constitution  (see   p.   235),   had   made  the   Catholic  Church almost  independent  of   the   state :   "   The   Evangelical  and   Catholic churches,  as  well   as  every  other  religious  body,   shall   govern  and manage  their  affairs  in   an   independent  manner."  The  government had   thus   abandoned  its   power  of   control  over  the   clergy  "   the   right   of   proposing,  nominating,  electing,  and   confirming  " bishops  and   -priests,   supervision  of   the   publication  of   ecclesiastical acts,   and   of   the   external  relations  of   the   churches.  It   had   at

the   same  time  charged  the   clergy   with  the   direction  of   the   religious instruction  in   the   primary   schools.  It   had   continued  to the   clergy   their  grants  of   public   money,  their  power  over  civil status,  their  right   to   public   honours,  and   the   enforcement  of   ecclesiastical authority   by   the   state.  This   meant  freedom  of   the   clergy from  control  of   the   civil   government,  while  remaining  a   public power.  The  bishops,  having   become  sole  masters  of   their  clergy, had  acquired  over  the   laity   a  political  influence  which  showed itself  sharply   in   the   formation  of   the   Centre  party.

This  unexpected  revelation  of   the   moral  power  of   the   clergy frightened  and   irritated  the   politicians.  It   became  the   fashion  to denounce  the   Ultramontanes  as   "   enemies  of   the   Empire,"  and   to compare  them  to  the   Guelphs  and  the   Socialists.  Then  began the   very  complicated  struggle  between  the   Centre  and  the   government which   goes   by   the   name  of   the   Culturkampf,  i.   e.f   the fight   for   civilization.  This  was  a   long   series  of   manifestoes  by the   Pope   or   the   Catholic  clergy   of   Germany,  and   of   repressive measures  by   the   government,  the   one   in   answer  to   the   other,   and growing  in   violence  as  the  struggle  progressed.  The  battle raged   both  in   the   Reichstag  and   in   the   Prussian  Parliament.

The  Centre  began  operations  in   the   Prussian  Parliament  by demanding  the  restoration  of   the   temporal  power  of   the   Pope (1871),   and   in   the   Reichstag  by   proposing  to   insert  in   the   Imperial Constitution  the   articles  of   the   Prussian  Constitution which  guarantee  religious  liberty.  Bismarck  took  a  special  dislike to   this   party.  It   had   for   its   leader  Windthorst,  a   Hanoverian Guelph,  who  supported  the  Polish  Catholics  of   Posen  in   their proposition  to   have  Polish  taught   in   the   primary  schools.

The  set  conflict  began   over  the   question  of   the   "   old   Catholic "   professors  in   the   Catholic  theological  faculties  of   the   Universities, and   Catholic  teachers  in   the   public   Gymnasien  (Latin schools),  who  rejected  the  doctrine  of   the   Pope's  infallibility. The  bishops  forbade  these  men  to   go   on  with  their  teaching  and then  excommunicated  them.  The  government,  not  itself  approving the   decrees  of   the   Vatican  Council,  refused  to   dismiss the   condemned  teachers.  The  bishops  protested  in   a  collective address  to  the   Emperor,  September,  1871.  The  limits  of   the powers  of   the   Church  were  thus  made  the   subject   of   conflict.

The  contest  gradually  widened.  The  priests,  particularly  in Bavaria,  spoke   from  their  pulpits   against   the   Old   Catholics  and the   government  that   protected  them.  On   request  of   the   Bavarian ministry,  the   Reichstag  passed  a  clause  supplementary  to  the

penal   code  of   the   Empire,  punishing  with  imprisonment  any priest   indulging  in   political  controversy  or   in   attacks  on   the   government from   the   pulpit   (the   "   Pulpit  Paragraph,"  December, 1871).  In   Prussia  the   Catholic  clergy   used  their  right   of   supervising the   primary   schools  by   dismissing  the   Old  Catholic teachers,  and   their  control  over  marriage  licenses  by   refusing  to marry  Old  Catholics.  The  government  decided  to  curtail  the powers  of   the   clergy.  It   proposed  a   bill   relating  to   marriages and   one  relating   to   the   inspection  of   schools.  The   Conservative party  and   the   Emperor  himself,  who  insisted  on   the   influence  of the   Protestant  clergy   over  the   schools  and  the   religious  character of   marriage,  were  reluctant  to   accept  proposals  so  contrary to   the   traditions  established  since  1840.   At,   first   the   government succeeded  only   with   the   bill   transferring  the   inspection  of   schools from  the   clergy   to   lay   inspectors  (February,  1872).   The  Minister of   Public  Worship,  a   partisan  of   the   clergy,   having   lost   Bismarck's confidence,  was  replaced   by   Falk,   a   partisan   of   the   power of   the   state.  The   bishops  protested,  and   the   bishop   of   Posen refused  to   apply   the   inspection  law.

Bismarck  tried  negotiations  with  the   court  of   Rome,  but   was unable  to   induce  the   Pope   to   accept  as  ambassador  Cardinal Hohenlohe.  He  complained  in   the  Reichstag,  where  he   pronounced the   famous  sentence,  "   We  shall  not  go   to   Canossa  " (May,   1872).  The  Pope   replied   in   an  allocution,  denouncing  the persecution  of   the   Church  in   Germany.  The  answer  of   the   government was   an   act   expelling   the   Jesuits   and   affiliated  orders from  Germany.  A   new  papal   allocution  against  the   "   hypocritical persecution  "   was  answered  by   the   recall  of   the   German  ambassador to   the   Vatican  (December,  1872).  Diplomatic  relations between  the   Pope   and   the   German  Empire  were  broken.

The  clergy,  forced  to  choose  between  their  spiritual  sovereign and   the   temporal   power,  unanimously  went  with   the   Pope. They   protested  against  the   commands  and  the   laws  of   the   civil power.  The  government,  especially  after  the   attempt  of   a   Catholic labourer  to   assassinate  Bismarck  (July,   1874),   treated  the clergy   as  rebels.  It   prosecuted  the   bishops,  seized  their  goods, deprived  them  of   their  jurisdiction,  and  finally  put   them  in prison.  At   the   same  time,   in   order  to   bring   the   clergy   under the   power  of   the   state,   it   secured  the   passage  of   the   three  series of   acts   known  as   the   "   May   Laws,"  or   "   Falk  Laws,"  1873-75. The  aim  at   first   was  to   transform  the   bishops  and   priests   into state  officials,  by   requiring  of   every  candidate  for   the   priesthood

three  years  of   study   at   the   Universities  and   an  examination  in "   general   culture  "   (philosophy  and  history),  also  by   requiring the   bishops   to   give   notice  to   the   government  of   every  ecclesiastical nomination,  in   order  that   the   administrative  officers  might   see to   the   enforcement  of   the   new  legislation.  The  state  also  assumed the   right   of   supervision  of   all   ecclesiastical  seminaries. In   order  to   deprive   the   clergy   of   their  official  authority  the   Emperor finally   made   up   his   mind,   in   1874,   to   accept   civil   marriage for   Prussia.  In   1874   an   imperial  act  established  obligatory  civil marriage  for   the   whole  Empire.  The  Pope,   by   an  ecclesiastical letter  to   the   Prussian  bishops,   solemnly  declared  these  laws  void, as  contrary  to   the   constitution  of   the   Church,  and   pronounced his   blessing  on  the   condemned  bishops.  The  conflict  had   become one  of   principle   between  the   two  powers.

The  government  demanded  a   declaration  of   submission  to   the new  laws,   and   withheld  the   salaries  of   the   bishops   and   priests   who refused  to   make  it.   It   induced  the   Prussian  Parliament  to   repeal the   articles  of   the   Constitution  of   1850   relating  to   the   independence of   the   Church;  also  to   pass,   in   1875,   a   law   dissolving all   monasteries  in   the   kingdom.  Then  Bismarck  declared  that the   "   armour  was  complete  "   and  that  the   state  would  keep   on the   defensive.  The   contest,  from  that   time  on,   consisted  in   manifestoes and   protestations  on   the   part   of   the   clergy,   and   on   the part   of   the   government  in   prosecutions  and   punishments  of   those making  them.  Some  of   the  bishoprics  and  parishes  were  left vacant;  but   the   Catholic  Centre,  instead  of   submitting,  increased its   strength  at   the   elections  of   1874,   and   entered  on  a   course  of systematic  opposition.

This  contest  caused  Bismarck  to   depart  from  his   old   policy. In   order   to   combat  the   Catholic  Centre,  he   made  approaches  to the   Liberal  parties   led   by   free-thinkers  and   Jews.   The   National Liberals,  nicknamed  "   Bismarck's  Party,"   had   been  elected  to   the number  of   152,   as   friends  of   the   government;  they   were  able  to make  a   majority  of   the   Reichstag  and  of   the   Prussian  Lower House,  by   combining  with  the   Progress  party.  The  Conservative ministers  of   the   "   conflict  time   "   had   been   replaced,  one  after another,  by   National  Liberals.  The  real  power  was  exercised by   a   coalition  of   Bismarck  and   the   Liberals.

Bismarck  still   held   the   reins.  He   yielded   nothing  to   his   new allies   that   could  strengthen  the   Reichstag,  and   he   rejected  with disdain  all   their   political  demands:  a  responsible  ministry  and payment  of   the   deputies  (they   had   only   free   passes  on  the   rail-

ways).  He   constrained  them  to   support  his   army  policy,   at   first by   a   provisional  arrangement;  then,   in   1874,   he   demanded  an increase  of   the   force  to   401,000  on  a  peace   footing;  he   even wished  to   have  a   permanent  appropriation  made  for   this   number of   soldiers,  and   was  with  difficulty  induced  to   accept  a   compromise. The   Reichstag  voted  the   provision  for   401,000  men,   for a   period   of   seven  years  :   this   was  called  the   "   military   septennate," with  allusion  to   MacMahon's  recently  voted  septennate  in France.  He  also  led  them  into  voting  for   the   military  penal code,   which  the   previous  Reichstag  had   found  too  severe;  also   a series  of   criminal  laws  intended  to   reach  the   different  kinds  of opponents  of   the   government  (one   of   these  was  called  the   "rubber paragraph  "   from  its   elastic  nature) ;   also   a   press   law   abolishing the   stamp  and   the   deposit   as  security,  but   fixing   severe  penalties for   attacks  on   the   government.

The  Liberal  parties  obtained  only   certain  administrative,  judicial, and   economic  reforms.  In   Prussia,  in   addition  to   lay inspection  of   schools  and  civil  marriage,  consequences  of   the Culturkampf,  the  reform  of   local  administration,  promised  in 1814,   was  at   last   carried  out   in   the   eastern  provinces.  The House  of   Lords  had  always  rejected  it;   it   rejected  it   again   in 1872,   but   in   that   year   Bismarck  induced  the   King   to  create twenty-five  new  members,  and  the  law  was  then  passed.  It abolished  the   judicial  and   police   powers  of   landowners  on  their domains,  and  changed  the   Circle  assemblies  into  elected  bodies, with  power  to   impose  taxes.

In   the   Empire  the   Reichstag  and   the   government  worked  in concert  to   establish  economic  and  judicial  unity.  The  war  indemnity of   five   thousand  millions  of   francs  paid   by   France  made easy  the   economic  arrangements.  Several  special  funds  were created - invalid  pensions,  war  chest,  fortresses,  navy.  A   uniform currency  was  established  in   1872,   with   the   mark  as   the   unit (=   24   cents).  The  old   paper  currency  of   the   individual  states was  replaced  with  notes  issued  by   the   Imperial  Treasury.  An Imperial  Bank  was  established.  The  customs  duties  on   iron were  almost  wholly  abolished  (1873).

In   the   field  of   judicial   reform,  the   individual  governments rejected  in   the   Federal  Council  the   plan   of   a  uniform  system adopted  by   the   Reichstag.  Four  years  were  necessary  for   reaching a   compromise.  A   conference  of   ministers  of   the   various states,  then  a   commission  of   jurists,   and   finally   a   committee  of the   Reichstag,  laboured  over  the   matter.  The  results  were  a

common  system  of   judicial  procedure  in   civil   matters,  a   general bankruptcy  law,   certain  common  principles  of   civil  law,   criminal procedure,  and   organization  of   courts.

The  French  war  indemnity,  distributed  as  repayment  of   outlays or   expended   on  public   works,   had   at   first   the   effect   of   raising prices   and   wages  and   of   stimulating  speculative  enterprises,  particularly in   the   construction  of   railways  and   in   the   building  of houses  in   Berlin.  This  was  the   period   of   "   promoters  "   and   of speculations  in   the   stock-exchange.  It   ended  abruptly  in   a   panic and  business  depression  (1874).

The  Conservative  party,   dissatisfied  with  the   reform  of   local administration,  with  the   measures  of   free  trade,  with  the   withdrawal of   the   schools  and   the   marriage  ceremony  from  clerical hands,  went  over  gradually  into  opposition  to   the   government. It   reproached  Bismarck  with  "   Germanizing  "   Prussia  and   with overturning  the   foundations  of   religion  and  society.  Emperor William,  who  remained  personally  devoted  to   the   church  and   the aristocracy,  gave   free   scope  to   his   Chancellor,  while  confessing to   his   intimate  friends  that   his   heart  was   full   of   misgivings.  It seems  that   some  of   the   Conservatives  hoped   to   bring   about  Bismarck's fall   and  to   set  up   in   his   place   Count  von   Arnim,  ambassador to   France,  a   favourite  at   court  backed  by   the   Empress. The  severe  struggle  between  Bismarck  and  von  Arnim  led   to   a public  explosion,  the   recall  and  arrest  of   von   Arnim,  followed by   his   trial   and   condemnation,  first   for   wrongfully  taking   public documents  from  his   embassy,  and  secondly  for   publishing  an anonymous  pamphlet  against  the   Chancellor  (1876).  The  Conservatives replied   by   a   newspaper  campaign  against  Bismarck. They   accused  him   of   being   bought   by   Jew   speculators,  particularly Bleichroeder  the   banker,   averring  that   he   had   opened   "   the Bleichroeder  era"  for   Germany;  hence  new  prosecutions.

Struggle  against  the   Socialists  (1878). - From  the   beginning of   the   Empire   the   government  had   combatted  the   Socialists  by means  of   prosecutions.  It   had  obtained  in   1872   the   condemnation of   their   two  chiefs  for   high   treason  and   in   1873   had   prosecuted their   journals   in   Berlin.  But,   perhaps  because  of   the industrial  distress  following  the   panic   of   1873,   the   Socialists  made rapid   gains   among  the   working  classes,  especially  in   Saxony, Holstein,  Thuringia,  and  Berlin.  At   the   elections  of   1874   they received  340,000  votes  and   then  coalesced  in   a   single   party   with a   centralized  management,  an  official  journal,  a   treasury,  and   an annual  congress. cuted

Bismarck  wished  to   check  their  agitation  by   laws  against   the press.  But   the   Reichstag,  anxious  for   liberty   of   the   press,  rejected his   proposals.  In   1877   the   Socialists  polled   480,000 votes.

The  two  attempts  on  the   life   of   the   Emperor  in   1878   finally gave  the   government  the   means  of   overcoming  the   scruples  of the   liberal  parties.  The   would-be  assassins  had  acted  on  their own  motion,  and  their  party   disavowed  their  acts :   but   they   were Socialists.  Bismarck  took  advantage  of   the   public   excitement caused  by   the   second  attempt  on   the   Emperor's  life   to   dissolve the   Reichstag,  with  which  he   was  already  at  variance  on   his economic  policy.  The  liberal  parties  lost  their  majority;  the new  Reichstag  voted  the  law  against  the  Socialist  agitators. This  was  an  exceptional  measure,  expressly  directed  "   against the  subversive  efforts  of   the  social  democrats."  It   forbade all   associations,  meetings,  and  publications  having  for  their object  "   the   subversion  of   the   social  order  "   or   in   which  "   socialistic tendencies  should  appear,  of   a   kind   to   endanger  the public   peace  and,   in   particular,  the   good   understanding  between the   classes  of   the   people."  It   gave   the   police   power  to   seize socialistic  publications  and  to  prohibit  or   disperse  socialistic meetings.  It   gave  the   governments  power  to  proclaim  for   a year  at   a   time,   in   any   threatened  city,   the   state  of   minor  siege, which  gave  the   administration  the   power  of   forbidding  all   meetings and   of   expelling   every  suspected  person.  The   law   was  to be   in   force   four   years.   Twice  extended  later,   it   lasted  till   1890. It   broke  up   the   official  organization  of   the   Socialists,  put   an  end to   their   clubs   and   their   publications.  According  to   statements  issued by   the   party   in   1890,   the   law   had,   in   twelve  years,  suppressed 1400  publications,  banished  900   persons,  and   condemned  1500   to prison.  But  the   party   had   reorganized  itself  under  the   guise   of local  societies,  outwardly  innocent  of   political  aims - such  as choral  societies,  smokers'  circles,  workingmen's  unions,  etc.  It had  kept   up   the   spread   of   its   doctrines  by   private   conversation and  by   means  of   flying   sheets  printed   in   secret.  'The   publication of   its   official  organ,  the   Social  Democrat,  was  carried  on   from Zurich  in   Switzerland,  whence  it   was  smuggled  into  Germany. The  socialist  "   Congress  "   was  also   held   outside  of   Germany.

The  repressive  measures  seemed  at   first   to   check  the   progress of   socialism.  At   the   elections  of   1881   the   party   polled   only   310,ooo  votes - electing  12   deputies.  But  in   1884   the   number  of voters  rose  to   550,000,  and  24   socialists  were  elected.  In   1887

and  1890   the   number  of   voters  rose  to   763,000   and   1,427,000,  respectively. These   results   showed  that   repression  was  a   failure.

Bismarck's  Economic  and   Social  Policy   (1878-86). - In   order  to put   down  the   Catholic  clergy,   Bismarck  had   allied  himself  with the   National  Liberals  and   had   accepted  their  economic  doctrines : a   customs  tariff  approaching  free   trade,   direct  taxes  for   Imperial revenue,  non-interference  by   the  state  in   questions  between labourers  and  employers.  Little  by   little  Bismarck  became  dissatisfied with   this   system;   at   the   same  time   he   was  growing   tired of   his   contest  with   the   Catholic  Church.  He   took  up   the   new currents  of   thought  that   had   begun   to   show  themselves  in   Germany.

Certain  professors  of   political  economy,  especially  Wagner  and Schmoller,  advocates  of   state  intervention  in   industrial  matters, had  founded  in   1872   a   "society  for   the   study* of   social  policy" (Verein  fur   Socialpolitik).  This  body   had   instituted  inquiries  into the   condition  of   the   labourers,  and   was  advocating  a  reform  of the   laws  relating  to   labour,  factory   inspection,  tenements,  and life   and   accident  insurance.  Their  opponents  nicknamed  them "   Socialists  of   the   chair."

The  protectionists,  aided  by   the   depression  of   1874,   had   started a   movement  for   reform  of   taxation  and   a   new  commercial  policy ; they   called  for   a   restoration  of   the   duties  on   iron,   which  had   been nearly   abolished  in   1873.   Bismarck  became  first   a   protectionist and  then  a   state-socialist.  He   began   by   proposing  a   new  tariff on   imports  (1877) ;   a   few   years   later   he   was  advocating  state   interference  with  industry  under  the   name  of   Social  policy.

As   early   as   1877,   the   imperial   budget   being   in   a   state  of   deficit, Bismarck  proposed  excise  taxes  on  cards  and  tobacco.  The National  Liberal  party   demanded  in   return  the   creation  of   an Imperial  ministry.  Bismarck  refused,  took  a   vacation,  and   came back  from  it   with  a   plan   involving  a   fiscal  revolution.  Up   to that   time  the   Empire  had   had   a   low   tariff,   approximately  free trade  in   principle,  and   slight   excise  taxes.  The  revenue  from customs  was  not  sufficient  for   the   expenses  of   the   Empire;  the deficit  had   been   made  up   by   contributions  demanded  yearly   from the   various  states  according  to   population.  Bismarck  wished  to have  high   duties,   like   other  great   states,   in   order  to   protect   home industries;  he   therefore  resolved  to   increase  the   imperial  revenues from  this   source  to   a   sufficient  extent  to   get   rid   of   the   need   of contributions.  Within  the   Empire  he   wished  to   establish  a   monopoly of   tobacco,  on  the   model  of   France,  and   to   increase  the

excise  duties.  The   imperial  budget   would  then  much  more  than balance ; the   surplus   would  be   distributed  to   the   states  and   would enable  them  to   lower  their  direct  taxes.  This  reform  would  give the   Empire  an   independent  revenue  system;  it   would  no   longer have  to   "   beg   at   the   door   of   the   states."

The  project  was  rejected  by   the   National  Liberals,  not  only for   its   antagonism  to   free   trade,   but   also   because  it   would  give the   government  a   revenue  independent  of   annual  vote  and   would thus  weaken  still   further  the   control  of   the   Reichstag  over  the administration.  Bismarck  then  abandoned  the  Liberals  and sought  a   majority  on   the   other  side   of   the   house,   by   coming   to an  understanding  with  the   two  conservative  parties   which  he   had just   been  fighting  - the   Prussian  Conservatives  and   the   Catholic Centre.  Taking  advantage  of   the  attempts  to  assassinate  the Emperor  in   1878,   he   dissolved  the   Reichstag  elected  in   1877,   tne Liberal  majority  of   which  had   just   rejected   his   tobacco  monopoly and  his   anti-Socialist  bill.  In   the   new  Reichstag  the   Liberal parties,   now  become  opponents  of   Bismarck,  lost   their  majority. By   a   coalition  of   the   Conservatives  and   Catholics,  a   new  majority was  formed,  ready   to   accept  a  part   at   least  of   Bismarck's  new economic  program.  It   took  at   first  the   form  of   an   "   economic group/'  consisting  of   204   members  who  declared  themselves  in favour  of   a   protective  tariff  (1878).

Bismarck  got   this  coalition  to   vote  his   new  tariff.  This  was protectionist,  without,  however,  raising  the   duties  on   foreign grain,   although  the   landowners  demanded  protection.  Bismarck thus  carried  some  fragments  of   his  program;  it   was  done taxes  on  tobacco,  coffee,  and   petroleum,  but   with  the   provision marks  should  be   distributed  to   the   states,  and   that   certain  of   the taxes  should  be   granted   only   for   a   year   at   a   time,   a   condition  in- slowly  and  by   a  compromise.  The  Reichstag  first  voted  the that   the   revenue  from  customs  and   excise  beyond   130,000,000  of tended to   preserve  the   financial  control  of   the   Reichstag  (1879). In   return  for   these  favours,  Bismarck  granted   his   new  allies  a change  of   domestic  policy   in   Prussia.  He   broke  with   his   Liberal colleagues;  Falk,  the   minister  of   the   Culturkampf,  gave  way to   a   Conservative  successor.  He   stopped  the   reform  of   local administration,  which  was  opposed  by   the   Conservatives.  The reconciliation  with  the   Centre  was  slower.  It   began   with   negotiations with   the   new   Pope,   Leo   XIII.,   which,   however,  came  to nothing.  The  questions  were  of   filling  the  bishoprics  and parishes  vacated  by   deaths  and   exclusions:  the   May   Laws  re-

quired  certain  declarations  which  the   ecclesiastics  declined  to make.  An  escape  was  found  by   the   device  of   getting  the   Prussian Parliament  to   grant   the   government  the   power  of   dispensing with  the  requirements  of   the  laws  (1880).  Thus  ended  the Culturkampf.  Subsequently  the  measures  adopted  during  the struggle  were  one   by   one  withdrawn  (1880-93).  There  remained only   civil   marriage  and   the   repeal   of   the   articles  relating   to   the Church  in   the   Constitution  of   1850.   The  Catholic  clergy   are considered  in   Germany  to   have  come  out  victorious  in   the   contest with  the   government.

In   this   change   of   policy   the   National  Liberal  party   broke  into two  parts.  One  section,  devoted  above  all   to   Bismarck,  followed him  and   joined   the   Right   (1879).  Another  section,  attached  to free   trade  and   to   the   May   Laws,   joined   the   Left   (1880),   forming the   secession  of   28   members  who  eventually  joined   the   Progress party   (1881).  This  crisis  brought  manifestations  of   ill   will   on the   part   of   Bismarck  toward  his   former  allies  and   ministerial colleagues,  together  with  various  flings   at   the   Reichstag  and   at parliamentary  government.  He   went  so   far   as   to   propose  biennial sessions  for   the   Reichstag,  and   vote  of   the   budget   for   a   twoyear  period   instead  of   annually.  At   the   elections  of   1881  the Liberal  parties   complained  of   the   pressure  put   upon  the   voters to   induce  them  to   support  the   ministerial  candidates.

The  coalition  of   the   Conservatives  and  the   Centre  also   voted the   purchase  of   the   Prussian  railroads.  Of   20,000  kilometers  of road,   6000  kilometers  belonged  to   the   state.  Bismarck  proposed the   purchase  of   all   the   roads  by   the   government.  He   succeeded in   purchasing  them  gradually,  beginning  in   1879.

In   order  to   counteract  the   Socialist  agitation  Bismarck  undertook to   make   the   imperial   government  popular   by   establishing  a government  system  of   life   and  accident  insurance,  intended  to better  the   condition  of   the   labouring  class.  This  was   his   "   social policy." He   began   by   the   creation,  in   November,  1880,   of   an   Economic Council  of   75   members  for   Prussia.  Then  he   proposed  a   bill on  accident  insurance,  announced  as  the   first  of   a  series.  In November,  1881,  the  Emperor,  in   a   famous  message,  laid   down the   principle  that  the   state  owes  help   to   "   its   needy   members," not  only   as   "   a   simple   duty   of   humanity  and   Christianity,"  but   as "   a   task   of   self-preservation."  It   is   necessary  to   "   create  even among  the  poor,  who  are  the   most  numerous  and   the   least  instructed class,   the   conception  of   the   state  as  an   institution  not

only   necessary  but   benevolent."  It   was  a   development  of   the modern  idea  of   the   state,  resulting  from  Christian  morality,  that, "   beyond   the   duty   of   defence,  the   state   has   the   task   put   upon   it ....  of   promoting  in   positive  ways  the   well-being  of   all   its members,  particularly  the   weak."  This  doctrine,  represented  by Bismarck  as  the   old   tradition  of   the   Prussian  Kings,   was   identical with   the   teachings  of   the   theorists  known  as   State  Socialists, and  of   the   new  party   calling   themselves  "   Christian  Socialists," which  had   just   been  founded  by   the   court  preacher,  Stoecker.

The  new  principle  was  put   in   practice  by   slow  instalments, painfully  wrung   from  the   Reichstag.  A   fund  was  created,  under imperial  management,  for   giving  pensions  to   labourers  disabled by   accident,  sickness,  or  old   age.   This  institution  was  greeted by   the   university  economists  of   Germany  as  a  social  revolution which  was  to   save  millions  of   labourers  from  suffering  and   interest them   in   the   preservation  of   society.  The   Socialists  treated it   as   a   trick   to   divert   the   labourers  from   the   pursuit   of   real   reform. It   does   not   seem,   in   fact,   to   have   drawn  the   labourers  to   support the   government.

In   the   Reichstag  elected  in   1881  the   Liberal  opposition  appeared with   increased  numbers  (Progressives,  58;   Secession  Liberals, 47).   Bismarck  made  a   closer  alliance  with   the   coalition  of Conservatives  and  Catholics.  He  got,   through  its   help,   some fragments  of   his   fiscal  and   social  program  and  a   law  against the   Anarchists.  His  tobacco  monopoly  was  rejected.

During  the  same  period  he   entered  upon  a  colonial  policy which,  begun   by   the   efforts  of   individuals  and   companies  (1880), resulted  in   the   creation  of   colonies  aided  by   grant's  of   money   from the   Reichstag.  This  was  a  new  field  for   opposition;  the   Reichstag of   1884   pronounced  against   the   colonial  policy.

The  Army  Law  and  the  "Cartel"  (1886-88). - The  coalition of   Conservatives  and  Centre  broke  on  the   question  of   colonies. The  Centre  deserted  Bismarck  and  joined  the   Progressives  and other  opposition  parties  to   defeat  the   appropriations  for   colonial purposes.  The  rupture  became  final  when  the   Prussian  government, having   expelled   the   Poles  from  the   eastern  provinces,  refused to   answer  questions  on  the   subject   in   Parliament.  A   coalition was   formed  to   oppose   Bismarck;  it   was   led   by   the   two  chiefs of   the   Centre  and   the   Progressives,  and,   as   it   included  a   majority of   the   Reichstag,  it   succeeded  in   defeating  Bismarck's  fiscal  proposals.

German  domestic  politics  were  disturbed  by   external  compli-

cations.  This  was  the   time  of   the   Boulanger  excitement  and   the Patriotic  League  in   France;  there  was  a   feeling   abroad  that   Germany was   threatened  with   a   war  against   France  and  perhaps Russia.  Bismarck  used  these  fears,  which  his   adherents  in   the press  seem  to   have  fomented,  to   get   the   better  of   his   opponents in   the   Reichstag.  He   asked,   in   1886,   for   a   renewal  of   the   military septennate,  although  it   did   not  expire   till   1888,   and   an   increase of   41,000  men  in   the   army.   The   Progressives  and   Centre voted  the   increase,  but   limited  the   duration  of   the   military  law to   three  years.  Bismarck  dissolved  the   Reichstag  in   January, 1887.

At   the   elections  of   1887   a   coalition  of   all   the   parties   favouring Bismarck  was  formed  to  oppose  the   enemies  of   the   Septennate. The  three  parties,   Conservatives,  Imperialists,  and   National  Liberals made   a   formal  agreement  (Cartel)   to   help   each  other  at the   second  ballotings.  (In   Germany  the   second  ballots  are  confined to   a   choice   between  the   two  candidates  standing  highest at   the   first   ballot.)   The   elections,  turning   on   the   military   question, resulted  unfavourably  for   the   opposition,  and   gave  a   considerable majority   for   the   Cartel:   220  against   175.

With  this  new  majority  Bismarck  controlled  the  Reichstag. He  got   his   army   law   passed   in   1888,   got   a   renewal  of   the   law against  the   socialists,  and   an  extension  of   the   duration  of   the Reichstag,  from  the   three-year  period   fixed  by   the   constitution to   five   years.   He   came  to   a   direct  understanding  with   the   Pope, who  consented  to  censure  the  Centre  for   opposing  the  army septennate;  in   return  Bismarck  got   an  act  through  the   Prussian Parliament  allowing  religious  orders  to   be   restored  in   Prussia. And,   finally,   he   succeeded  in   passing   several  bills   embodying  his "   social  policy."

William  I.   died  in   March,  1888.  His  son  and  successor, Frederick  III.,   was  suffering  with  a   fatal  disease  at   the   time  of his   accession.  With  him  and   his   wife   Victoria,  daughter  of   the

William  II,   and   Christian  Socialism. - Bismarck  had   governed Prussia  since  1862  and   the   Empire  since  its   establishment.  He had  been  the   trusted  adviser  of   William  I.   In   all   his   contests with  the   Prussian  Parliament,  with  the  Reichstag,  with  colleagues in   the   Prussian  ministry,  with  the   Federal  Council,  his master  had  always  sustained  him.  Frequently  by   threatening resignation,  which  William  I.   would  never  accept,  he   was  able to   crush  opponents.  He   had   come  to   be   regarded  as   the   necessary head   of   the   government.

English  Queen,  Bismarck  had  been  in   standing  disagreement, as   they   were  advocates  of   parliamentary  government  on  the English  pattern.  The  new  reign   was  too  short  to  change  the policy   of   the   government  (Frederick  died  in   June,   1888).   But it   raised  at   the   new  court  an  active  movement  against  Bismarck. The  struggle  led   to   the   publication  of   Frederick's  III.'s  diary   for the   years   1870-71,  in   which  were  some  passages  unfavourable to   Bismarck.  Bismarck  had  the   editor  prosecuted  as  a   falsifier, but   the   result  was  an  acquittal  (1889).

William  II.   had   been  known  as  an  admirer  of   his   grandfather and  Bismarck.  He  was  an  enthusiast  for  the  army  and  the Church.  His   first   utterances  showed  him  to   be   a   prince   imbued with  the   military  and   religious  spirit   of   the   Prussian  kings,   a believer  in   the   divine  right   of   rulers,   a   pronounced  enemy  of   the socialists  and   free-thinkers.

His  first   proclamation  was  to  the   army  and  navy.   In   his proclamation  to   the   people   he   announced  that  he   had   assumed the   government  "   in   presence  of   the   King   of   kings   and   had   promised God   to   be   a   just   and   clement  prince,   to   cultivate  piety   and the   fear   of   God."  In   opening  the   Reichstag,  he   announced  his intention  of   continuing  the   legislative  work  of   his   grandfather, particularly  as   to   the   things   mentioned  in   his   message  of   November, 1  88 1 : "   protection  of   the   labouring  classes  .   .   .   according to   the   principles   of   Christian  morality."

Then  he   adopted  the   practice  of   giving   out   his   personal  impressions on   political   matters  in   after-dinner  speeches,  impromptu discourses,  answers  to   addresses,  speeches  to   the   recruits joining   the   army  and   navy,  etc.  Instead  of   the   retired and  sedentary  life   of   his   predecessors,  he   adopted   a   life   of   incessant movement  and   bustle :   trips   to   all   the   monarchies  of   Europe, progresses  through  all   parts   of   his   empire,   yachting  trips   over all   the   northern  seas.  In   Berlin  he   got   the   nickname  of   William the   External.  He   continued  to   show  a   passionate  interest  in   the army,  directing  its  exercises,  assisting  at   its   reviews  and manoeuvres  in   all   parts   of   the   empire.

His  political  utterances  showed  especially  his   respect   for   religion, his   hatred  of   social  revolution,  his   admiration  for   personal government  and   military  discipline.  After  the   success  of the   socialists  at   the   elections  of   1890,   his   reference's  to   the   struggle against   "   the   subversive  elements  "   became  menacing.  In Silesia  he   expressed  the   wish  that   the   "   citizens  might   at   length wake  from  their  sleep   and   not   leave  the   state  and   its   organs  to

fight   the   revolutionary  elements  singlehanded."  He   hoped   there might   be   success  in   "   re-establishing  respect   for   the   Church,  respect for   the   law,   and   unquestioning  obedience  to   the   crown." At   a   dinner  given   to   the   Estates  of   the   province  of   Brandenburg in   1890,   he   said:  "   The   spirit   of   disobedience  is   abroad  in   the country.  It   uses  an  ocean  of   printer's  ink   and   paper   to   obscure paths   that   are  and   ought   to   be   clear  to   anybody   who   knows  me and  my  principles."  At   Munich,  in   a   visitor's  album,  he   wrote: Suprema  lex   regis   voluntas  esto   (Let   the   King's   will   be   highest law).   .  .   To   the   recruits  who  had   taken  the   military  oath  at Potsdam  in   November,  1891,   he   made  an  address  regarding their  duty   in   case  of   outbreak,  in   which  he   is   reported  to   have said :   "   You  are  now  my  soldiers,  you   have  given   yourselves  to me   body   and   soul.  There  is   now  but   one  enemy   for   you,  and that   is   my   enemy.  In   these  times  of   socialist  intrigues  it   may happen  that   I   shall   order  you   to   fire   on  your   brothers  and   fathers. God  save  us   from  it  !   But   in   such   a   case  you   are   bound  to   obey me  without  a   murmur."

Meanwhile  he   intervened  personally  in   special   questions.  He called  an   international  conference  to   consider  labour  legislation. He   took  part   in   a   school  conference  called  to   discuss  a   reform of   secondary  education,  and  expressed  the  opinion  that  more time  ought   to   be   given   to   modern  subjects.  He   even  sketched a  plan   for   instruction  in   history   which  should  begin   with  the events  of   our  own  time.  .   .

At   the   beginning  of   his   reign   he   allowed  Bismarck  to   govern. But  soon  the   change  of   sovereign  brought  a  change  in   parties, and   presently  a   change   in   the   ministry.

The  Conservative  party,   being   in   sympathy  with  the   religious views  of   the   Emperor,  drew  away   from  the   alliance  with  the National  Liberals,  who  were  suspected  of   indifference  to   religion. The  breach  began   in   Prussia  over  a   bill   for   making   the   primary schools  free.  The  Conservatives  joined   the   Catholics  in   opposing the   bill,   and   defeated  it   (1888).   Then  the   Kreu-zzeitung,  the organ  of   the   Conservatives,  openly   attacked  the   Cartel  as   "   antiChristian,"  as  a   union  of   the   "   gold   of   Conservative  principle  with the   baser  metal  of   liberalism."

The  Conservatives  had  as  chiefs  two  leaders  of   the   new  conservative socialistic  movement:  Wagner, the   economist  representing state   socialism;  and   Stoecker,  the   court  preacher,  founder  of the   "   Christian  Socialists."  This  party,  started  in   1878   as  a workingman's  party,  announced  that  it   "   placed  itself  on  the ing

foundation  of   Christian  faith,   love  of   the   King   and   the   fatherland, and   rejected   social  democracy  as   impracticable,  antiChristian,  and  anti-patriotic."  It   was,  therefore,  a  monarchical and   ecclesiastical  party,   but   it   asked  of   the   state  profound  social changes :   compulsory  corporations  with  aid   from  the   state,   labour legislation,  inspection  of   factories,  funds  for   insurance  against accidents  and   sickness,  a   progressive  tax  on   incomes  and   inheritances, regulation   of   the   hours   of   labour.  It   opposed   its   program to   those  of   the   old   Liberal  parties,   champions  of   industrial and  commercial  freedom,  and  declared  itself  the   foe   of   the   Manchester school   and   the   Jews.   Stoecker,  although  his   following remained  small,  acquired  an   influence  over  the   Conservatives  by his   unceasing  campaign  of   agitation.

The  Emperor  stepped  in   to   maintain  the   coalition  between  the Conservatives  and  National  Liberals.  He  stopped  Stoecker's political  campaign,  censured  the   Kreuzzeitung,  and  announced in   the   government  organ  that  he   regarded  the   Cartel  as  an  arrangement favourable  to   the   principles   of   his   government.  The Cartel  was  renewed  for   the   elections  of   1890,   but   without  a   common program.  The  electoral  campaign  was  made  against  the enhancement  of   prices  of   provisions  by   the   new  imposts  and against  the   tendency  to   reaction  in   religion  shown  by   the   ministerialists. It   resulted  in   a   complete  defeat  for   the   parties   of   the Cartel:  they   lost   more  than  a   third  of   their  seats,  getting   only 135   instead  of   their  previous  220;  whereas  the   opposing  parties came  back  with  greatly  increased  strength.

The  "   New  Course." - The  government  having  lost   its   majority, Bismarck  proposed  to   make  up   a   new  one   by   a   coalition  of   Conservatives and   Catholics.  The   Emperor  refused.  As   early   as 1889   a   latent  schism  had   begun   between  Bismarck  and   the   personal friends   of   William  II.,   especially   Count  Waldersee,  chief   of staff.  Relations  were  already  somewhat  strained  between  the Emperor  and  the   Chancellor,  owing   to   the   latter's  dislike  of   the international  conference  regarding  labour  questions.  On   the   Emperor's refusal   to   approve   Bismarck's  project   of   a   new  coalition, and  Bismarck's  refusal  to   forego   the   regulation  of   1852,   which forbade  any   Prussian  minister  to   communicate  with  the   King otherwise  than  through  the   Minister-President,  confidential  relations between  them   came  to   an  end.

The  rupture  was  abrupt  and  startling:  Bismarck  was  asked  to resign  both  his   imperial  chancellorship  and  his   position  as  a Prussian  minister.  His  successor,  General  Caprivi,  was  at   once

## 506  THE   GERMAN  EMPIRE.

installed  (March,  1890).  By   a   despatch  couched  in   nautical terms,  the   Emperor  announced  the  event  and  his   intention  to make  no  change  in   policy:   "   I   am  as  much  afflicted  as   if   I   had lost   my   grandfather  anew;  but   we  must  endure  whatever  God sends  us,   even   if   we  should  have   to   die   for   it.   The   post   of   officer on  the   quarter-deck  of   the   ship   of   state  has   fallen  to   me;   the course  remains  unchanged.  Forward  with  all   steam!  "

In   point   of   fact,   after   Bismarck's  retirement,  the   government policy  took  a  somewhat  different  direction,  which  got   named "   the   new  course."  It   was  at   first   a   change   in   the   personal  relations between  the   Chancellor  and   the   members  of   the   Reichstag. The  discussion's,  which  had  been  bitter  under  Bismarck,  whom the   least   contradiction  irritated,  became  more  calm  under  Caprivi. The  latter  declared  himself  ready   to   accept   "   ideas  to   which  the too  powerful  personality  of   Bismarck  was  an  obstacle."  He   allowed greater   liberty   of   the   press   and   of   public   meetings.  Even the   parties   most  opposed  to   his   policy,   the   Progressives  and   Socialists, were   less   aggressive   in   their   opposition.  The   exceptional law  against  the   Socialists,  which  expired  in   1890,   was  not  renewed. The   Socialist  party   reorganized  itself  openly,   with   its newspapers,  its   treasury  maintained  by   contributions  from  its members,  its   "   congresses  "   held   in   Germany,  and   its   official  body of   managers.  But  it   assumed  a   less  revolutionary  tone.  The new  government  was  helped  by   the   easier  mood  of   all   the   parties, relieved  as   they   were  of   the   feeling   of   compression  from which  they   had   suffered  under  the   autocratic  sway  of   Bismarck.

In   commercial  matters  the   new  government,  without  returning to   free   trade,   adopted  a   system  of   commercial  treaties,  at   first with  the   allies  of   the   Empire,   Austria-Hungary  and   Italy   (1891), then  with  other  countries.  The  aim  of   the   treaties  was  to   open markets  for   the   products  of   German  manufactures  and  to   avoid the   embarrassments  caused  by   sudden  changes  of   tariffs  on  the part   of   customer  countries.

This  change  of   commercial  policy   was  connected  with  a   change of   foreign   policy.  The  government  gave  up   the   effort  after  a Russian  alliance  and  took  up   a  more  friendly  attitude  toward the   Poles.  In   Prussia  it   stopped  the   scheme  for   Germanizing Posen.  Bismarck  had   tried  to   introduce  there  a   German  population by   establishing  a   fund  for   the   purchase  of   Polish  estates the   lands  to   be   sold   again   to   German  farmers.  He   had  also tried   to   extirpate  the   Polish  language  from  the   primary  schools. But   it   was  shown  that   Polish,  instead  of   receding,  had   gained

ground  since  1860.  The  Catholic  Poles  were  not  becoming Germanized,  and  a   part   of   the   German  population  had   become Polish  in   speech.  The  government  made  a  reconciliation  with its   Polish  subjects,  gave   them  a   Pole  as  archbishop,  and   received Polish  nobles  with  favour  at  the   court  in   Berlin.  The  Poles, perhaps  out  of   hatred  for   Russia,  became  friendly  to   the   Prussian government.  Both  in   the  Prussian  Parliament  and  in   the Reichstag,  the   Polish  party,   hitherto  in   systematic  opposition, became  steadfast  supporters  of   the   government.

Meanwhile  the   policy   of   coalition  with  the   Catholic  Centre, which  Bismarck  had   urged,   had   been  forced  on  the   government. The  Conservatives  refused  to   support  its   plan   of   communal  reform; the   National  Liberals  were  opposed  to   its   labour  legislation and   the   increase  of   army  expenditure.  Caprivi   made  terms for   the   support  of   the   Centre.  He   granted  it,   in   1890,   a   law relieving  persons  studying  for   the   priesthood  from  the   obligation of   military   service  (the   Protestant  theological  students  asked  not to   be   included).  In   return  the   Centre  voted  for   the   two  measures long   discussed  in   Prussia - the   reform  of   the   national  income tax   and   the   reform  of   local   administration  in   the   eastern provinces  (1891).  The  first  adopted  the   principle  of   a  slightly increasing  rate  on   incomes  above  30,000  marks  ($7,200),  using the   taxpayer's  declaration  as  a   basis  of   proceeding.  A   portion   of the   increased  proceeds  from  the   income  tax  was  to   be   turned over  to   the   communes  in   order  to   lighten   local  taxes.  The   act regarding  local  administration  at   length  completed  the   reform begun  in   1808  by   creating  in   the   eastern  provinces,  not  communes on   the   French  plan   (the   villages   being   too  small  and poor),   but   unions  on   the   English   plan,   for   certain  special   objects - roads,  schools,  poor  relief. ures

On  a   question  relating  to   the   Prussian  school  system,  a   coalition was  made  between  the   two  parties   favourable  to  clerical influence - the   Protestant  Conservatives  and   the   Catholic  Centre. The  government  proposed  to  suppress  mixed  schools  and  to make  all   education  sectarian;  the   ordinary  teachers  to   give   the religious  instruction,  but   under  licenses  granted  by   ecclesiastical authorities,  and   subject   to   revocation  by   the   same.  All   the   other parties  joined   in   opposition  to   the   scheme.  In   the   debate  the ministers  declared  that  the   issue  was  between  Christianity  and atheism.  The  universities  and  city   councils  sent  up  protests against  the   measure.  The  Emperor,  shaken  by   the   widespread opposition,  withdrew  his   support  of   the   bill.  A   ministerial  crisis

followed.  Caprivi  wished  to  resign,  but   was  only   relieved  of his   position   as   head   of   the   Prussian  ministry - retaining  his   office of   Imperial  Chancellor  (March,  1892).

The  Conservatives,  disappointed  in   the   Emperor,  turned  to   the anti-Semites,  who,   under  the   name  of   Social  Reform,  were  gaining support  among  the   lower  middle  class.  A   gathering  of Conservatives  adopted  a   declaration  that  "   the   Church  and  the state  are   divine  institutions  between  which  a  cordial  co-operation is   necessary  for   cherishing  the   life   of   the   people.   .   .   We   are opposed  to  the   influence  of   the   Jews   which  has   fastened  itself on  the   country  and   is   devouring  its   life."  Bismarck,  in   retirement on   his   estates,  carried  on  a   petty   warfare  of   newspaper articles  and  interviews  against  his   successor.  He   reproached him  with  having  compromised  the  safety  of   the  Empire  by alienating  Russia,  and  with  sacrificing  the   interests  of   German producers  by   abandoning  protection.  His   trip   to   Vienna  in   1892 was  the   occasion  of   ovations  half   intended  as  censures  of   the   government; public   servants  were   forbidden  to   take   part   in   them.

Against  the  commercial  policy  of   the  government,  a  new economic  party  was  formed,  which  had  its   following  chiefly among  the  Conservatives  of   eastern  Prussia.  Their  grievance was  the   low   price   of   farm  products  in   1892.   They took  the   name  of)   the   "   Farmers'  League."  The  leader  of   the movement,  an  obscure  farmer  of   Silesia,  said  in   his   published statement:  "We  must  give   up   being   Liberals,  Ultramontanes, and  Conservatives;  we  must  unite  in   one  great   Farmers'  Party, to   try   and   get   more  influence  over  parliaments  and   legislation." The  party  organized  local  branches,  with  a  central  bureau  and a   membership  fee   equal   to   three  per   cent,  of   the   member's  land tax.  Its   platform  demanded  a  protective  tariff  on  agricultural products,  free  coinage  of   silver,  the   institution  of   Chambers  of Agriculture,  supervision  of   corn  exchanges.  The  party  opposed the   commercial  treaty,  made  in   1894,   with  Russia;  it   demanded that  the   importation  of   foreign  grain   be   made  a  government monopoly.

The  government,  attacked  by   the  Conservatives,  was  supported, somewhat  hesitatingly,  by   the   Progressives  and  the Centre.  The  harmony,  such  as   it   was,  came  to   an  end   on   the new  military  question.  As   in   1860,   the   population  had   increased and  the   existing  regiments  were  no   longer  sufficient  to   receive all   the   recruits;  there  were  60,000   in   excess.  The  government asked  for   an  appropriation  for   100,000  additional  soldiers;  but,

in   contrast  with  the   course  taken  in   1860,   it   proposed  to   reduce, conditionally,  the   term  of   active  service  in   the   infantry   from   three years  to   two.  The  Progressives  refused  the   additional  appropriation, except   on  condition  that   the   reduction  of   service  be made  final.  The  Centre  asked  for   concessions  in   ecclesiastical matters  as  a   condition  of   its   support.  The  bill   was  rejected  in May,   1893,   and   the   Reichstag  was   dissolved.

At   the   elections  of   1893   the   Progressives  fell   apart  on  the army  question,  some  of   them  favouring  the   government's  scheme, the   rest  opposing  it   and   trying   to   combine  with  the   democratic party  of   southern  Germany;  they   returned  from  the  elections greatly  reduced  in   strength.  Most  of   the   other  parties  gained some  seats - a   fact   which  enabled  the   government  to  carry  the army   law,   by   1 1   majority,  in   the   new   Reichstag.

The  greatest  success,  however,  was  won  by   the   Socialists.  No other  party  received  so  many  votes - 1,786,000,  instead  of   the 1,427,000  received  in   1890.   The  next  most  numerous  party,  the Conservatives,  received  only   1,038,000  votes.  The  Socialists carried  only   44   seats,   but   this   was   because  the   districting  was unfavourable  to   them.  The  districts  remain  as   they   were  made in   1867-71;  but   the   large   cities  and   manufacturing  regions,  in which  the   Socialists  have  their  chief  strength,  have  greatly  increased in   population  since  that  date.

The  struggle  against  the   Socialists  became  the   Emperor's  chief concern.  In   a   prepared  speech   at   Koenigsberg  he   said :   "   Gentlemen, to   you   I   address  my   appeal:  stand  up   and   fight   for   religion, morality,   and   order   against   the   champions  of   subversion!  " The  government  prepared  a   "   bill   against  subversion,"  which became  an  occasion  of   difficulty  between  Chancellor  Caprivi  and Eulenburg,  head  of   the   Prussian  ministry:  the   result  was  that both  retired  from  office,   in   October,  1894.

The  new  Chancellor,  Hohenlohe,  proposed  a   bill   creating  new penalties  for   inciting  soldiers  to   disobedience,  or  attacking  religion, the   monarchy,  marriage,  the   family,   or  property.  The Conservatives  and  the   Catholics  accepted  the   principle  of   the   bill ; but   in   the   debate  in   the   Reichstag  attacks  were  made  on   the   universities and   their   "   socialists  of   the   chair,"   which  annoyed  the Liberal-Conservatives.  Later  the  committee  of   the   Reichstag amended  the  bill  to  suit  the   Catholics.  All   the   other  parties united  in   defeating  it   (May,   1895).

The  Conservative  party,  already  deeply  affected  by   the   introduction of   the   Farmers'  Party,   and   by   the   understanding  with   the

anti-Semites,  was  shaken  by   a   schism  among  the   Christian  Social party.  In   opposition  to   the   aristocratic  element,  Parson  Naumann  had  drawn  away  the   mass  of   the   party   to   support  a   democratic policy   of   "   aiding   the   labouring  class  to   organize  itself  and attain  equality  on  a   Christian  basis."  By   demanding  that   farm labourers  should  have  the   right   to   form  unions,  he   brought  on a  rupture  with  the  great   landowning  Conservatives  and  the Kreuzseitung,  which  denounced  him  as  an  ally   of   the   Socialists. The  Emperor  pronounced  publicly  against  the   Christian  Social party.  "   Political  parsons/'  he   said,   "   are  a   monstrosity.  Whoever is   a   Christian  is   also   social."  The   Anti-Semites  had   already declared  themselves  a   party  of   the   people,   hostile  to   squires   and country  gentlemen.  It   would  seem,  then,   that   the   Conservatives are  getting   drawn  into   a   democratic  evolution.

Alsace-Lorraine. - The  region  taken  from  France  in   1871   has ·been  kept   ever  since  in   an  exceptional  condition,  which  makes necessary  a  separate  sketch  of   its   history.  The  region   includes three  districts  corresponding  roughly  to   the   three  French  departments: Upper   Alsace  (Haut-Rhin),  a   manufacturing  district,  by majority  Catholic;  Lower  Alsace  (Bas-Rhin),  agricultural,  and   by majority  Protestant;  Lorraine  (Moselle),  agricultural  and  wholly Catholic.  Most  of   Lorraine  is   French  in   language  and   ignorant of   German.  In   the   rest  and  in   Alsace  a   dialect  of   German  is spoken,  very   hard  for   a   North  German  to   understand - in   Upper Alsace,  impossible.*

According  to   Prussian  practice,  the   country  was  annexed  without consulting  the   inhabitants.  Bismarck  seems  to   have  had a   hope   of   conciliating  them  easily.   He   said   in   the   Reichstag  in 1871,   while  admitting  the   repugnance  of   the   Alsace-Lorrainers to   the   union  with   Germany:  "   It   is   our   duty   to   overcome  it   by our  patience.  I   feel   myself   called  on   to   be   their   advocate  in   the new  state  they   are  entering."  In   order  to   keep   the   country under  his   own  hand,  he   had   it   erected  into   an   Imperial  Land (Reichsland),  governed  directly  by   the   Chancellor  of   the   Empire. It   is   represented  in   the   Reichstag  by   elected  deputies,  but   not represented  in   the   Federal  Council,  because  it   has   no  state  government of   its   own.  It   is   subject   to   the   laws   of   the   Empire,   but retains  its   own  special   laws - the   French  laws   in   force  before  the annexation.

- Provisionally  Alsace-Lorraine  remained  under  a   dictatorship, *   The  German  Census  of   1880  gives   44   of   the   855   communes  in   Alsace as   French-speaking;  and  for   Lorraine  341   French  as  against  370   German.

governed  autocratically  by   the   agents  of   the   Chancellor.  The administration  continued  to   be   organized  on  the   French  plan, with  a   President  instead  of   prefects,  Kreisdirektors  instead  of   subprefects,  Bur   germeisters  instead  of   Maires;  the   local  councils  of the  French  system  were  retained.  But  instead  of   the  twelve arrondissements  of   the   French  rule   there  were  22   Circles  (Kreise) made.  All  the  officials  appointed  by   the  Chancellor  were Germans.

Troubles  soon  began  between  the   inhabitants  and  the   administrative officers   on   the   subject   of   language   and   various  French demonstrations.  The  administration  worked  systematically  to extirpate  French  from  the   schools,  from  official  proceedings,  and from  public   institutions,  including  the   railroads,  now   become  state property;  it   was  even  forbidden  on  signs   and   posters.  Fine  and imprisonment  were  used  to'   repress  manifestations  of   sympathy with  France  in   any   form.  Journals  with  French  tendencies  and journals  coming  from  France  were  suppressed.  The  people complained  that  the   German  officials,  accustomed  to   a  precise and  patriarchal  system,  made  their  administrative  attentions oppressively  felt   by   the   subjects;  the   officials  charged   the   inhabitants with   treating   them   as   infected  persons  and   "   boycotting  " them.

Then  came  the   contest  regarding  option.  The  treaty  of   Frankfort gave   the   inhabitants  of   the   annexed  provinces  the   right   of choosing  to   be   French  citizens.  At   the   end   of   the   time   given   for choice  (October,  1872)   the   number  choosing  French  nationality was  164,000.  But  the   government  announced  that  it   should  regard the   option   as   valid   only   when  followed  by   emigration;  it treated  as   German  subjects  all   who  remained  in   the   country. gard

The  introduction  of   the   German  military  system   brought  other conflicts.  Many  young  Alsace-Lorrainers,  not  willing  to   serve Germany,  took  refuge  in   France.  .  .   The  German  government held  their  families  responsible.

The  trouble  connected  itself  with  the   Culturkampf.  The  Alsatian clergy   tried   to   keep   French  in   the   Catholic  schools.  A society,  with  French  connections,  was   founded  for   the   defence  of Catholic  interests.  The  government  expelled  the   vicar-general of   Strasburg.

The  dictatorship,  continued  to   1874,   had   succeeded  in   giving Alsace-Lorraine  a   German  administration,  but   had  not  made  it acceptable  to   the   people.  The  government  at   length   decided  to admit  the  Imperial  Province  to  the   benefits  of   ordinary  law.

Alsace-Lorraine  was  put   under  the   legislative  power  of   the   Empire, and   was  given   15   representatives  in   the   Reichstag.  The first   delegation,  elected  in   1874,   was  entirely   composed  of   "   Protesters." They   went  to   the   Reichstag  to   present  a   collective protest  against  the   annexation  of   their  country  to   Germany,  and to   demand  that   the   people   should  be   allowed  to   decide  their  fate themselves.  They   then  retired  from  the   body.

Later  there  was   formed  in   Alsace-Lorraine  a  party  which,  instead of   protesting  against  the   German  government,  aimed  to make  terms  with  it   in   order  to   have  the   regime   of   conquest  relaxed. Its   avowed  object  was  to  obtain  autonomy  for   AlsaceLorraine;  that  is,   the   right   to   regulate  its   domestic  affairs  and have  elected  representatives  and   a   budget,   like   the   German  states of   the   Empire.  This  Autonomist  party   had  its   strength  chiefly in   Protestant  Lower  Alsace.  It   began   operations  in   the   departmental councils,   where  the   Protesters,  in   order  to   avoid  taking the   oath   of   allegiance  to   the 'Emperor,  refused  to   sit.   In   1874   out of   94   councillors  elected  49   refused  to   sit.  In   15   cantons  no elections  were  held.  But  the  Autonomists  were  willing  to sit,   a   fact   which  enabled  the  government  to  open  one  of the  three  councils - that  of   Lower  Alsace.  To  strengthen this   party,  the   government  instituted  a   Provincial  Committee (Landesausschuss),  consisting  of   30   delegates,  10   from  each  department, with   a   right   to   be   consulted  in   the   legislation,  taxes, and  expenditure  of   the   province.  It   is   the   embryo  of   a   future legislature  for   Alsace-Lorraine.

The  Autonomists,  openly  encouraged  by   the   administration, took  charge  of   the   Committee,  the   Protesters  refusing  to  sit, and  entered  into  working  relations  with  the  government.  It took  up   the   discussion  of   practical  affairs,   avoiding  questions  of national  policy.  The  party   became  strong  enough  to  elect,  in 1877,   the   whole  five  members  of   the  Reichstag  for  Lower Alsace.  The  government,  thinking  reconciliation  with  the  annexed population  had   begun,   resolved  to   adopt   a  new  system, the   third   since  1871.

The  Provincial  Committee  received  power,  in   1877,   to  vote laws  and   the   budget.  The  government,  thereafter,  could  choose between  this  body   and  the  Reichstag  in   getting  legislation adopted  for   Alsace-Lorraine.  Presently  the   administration  was transferred  from  Berlin  'to   Strasburg;  an   Imperial  governor (Statthalter)  was  appointed,  assisted  by   a   Secretary  of   State  and a   Council  composed  of   higher   officials,  and   ten  or  more  notables

chosen  by   the   government - an   institution  that  may   develop  into an  upper   House.  The  province  was  even  given   a   delegate  to represent  it   in   the   Federal  Council  of   the   Empire - without  the right   of   voting,   however.  The  Autonomists  were  beginning  to demand  complete  equality  with  the   other  states  of   the   empire: Alsace-Lorraine  should  be   transformed  into  an   Imperial  state (Kaiserland),  in   which  the   Emperor  should  be   the   local  prince.

The  first   Statthalter,  General  Manteuffel,  arrived  with  a   program of   reconciliation.  He   said :   "   The   Emperor  has   sent  me   to your  country  to   heal   wounds,  not  to   make  them.  I   am  to   concili'ate  the   feelings   that   are  quite   natural  after  separation  from a   country  like   France.  I   am  to   smooth  the   change   by   an  administration both   just   and  advantageous  to  the   intellectual  and material  interests  of   the   inhabitants."  Manteuffel  did,   in   fact, try,   by   acts  of   good-will  and   by   an  administration  that   he   considered fatherly,   to   reconcile  the   people   to   the   government.  But the   existence  of   the   Autonomist  party  rested  on  a  misapprehension ; the   Autonomists  could  carry  elections  only   by   confining their  policy   to   a   recognition  of   the   fact   of   German  rule,   without in   any   way  accepting  it   as   legitimate.  At   the   elections  of   1881, Manteuffel  asked  of   them  "   a   loyal   and   open  recognition  of   the union  of   Alsace-Lorraine  with  Germany."  The  party  was  shattered by   the   suggestion;  none  but   Protesters  were  elected.

The  German  government,  without  changing  institutions,  reverted to   the   methods  of   the   early   years - the   discretionary  power of   the   officials  and   the   repression  of   popular   manifestations.  The conflict  with  the   people   went  on.  The  administration,  in   order to   turn  the   minds  of   the   children  away   from  France,  prohibited the   teaching  of   French  in   the   schools;  confiscated  French  newspapers; excluded,   or   limited  to   a   few   days'   stay,   Frenchmen,  even Alsatians  by   birth,   who  had   been  naturalized  in   France.

The  elections  of   1887   showed  the   feeling   of   the   people.*  The question  in   the   canvass  was  the   new  army   bill   (see   p.   501).   The government  gave  out  that  a  vote  against  the  supporters  of the   bill   would  be   a   vote   in   favour  of   an   invasion  by   France. The  voters  got   the   impression  that  the   election  was  a  sort  of' plebiscite  between  Germany  and  France,  and  cast  a   full   vote  for the   Protesting  candidates.  The  government  sharpened  its   repression ; it   expelled  Frenchmen,  even  one  who  had   been  elected to  the  Reichstag;  confiscated  newspapers,  dissolved  societies

*   The   state  of   feeling   in   Alsace  is   well   described  by   an   Alsatian  (under the   pseudonym  HeimweK)  in   La  Question  d'  Alsace,  1889.

33

suspected  of   French  leanings,  prosecuted  persons  carrying  anything blue,   white,   and   red   on   their   persons,  and   brought   members of   the   Patriotic  League  to   trial   for   high   treason.  In   1888, in   order  to   check  intercourse  with  France,  it   restored  the   old system  of   passports;  reviving  certain  exceptional  French  laws of   1795   to   1814,   which  had   become  obsolete;  it   demanded  passports of   travellers  entering  by   the   French  frontier.  Chancellor Caprivi  explained  in   1890   that   "   the   experiment  of   Germanizing the   people   having   failed,   there  was   left   only   the   resource  of   deepening the   ditch   that   divides  Alsace-Lorraine  from  France." Passports  were  discontinued  in   1891,   but   the   discretionary  power of   the   Statthalter  suffices  to   maintain  the   exceptional  system.

In   the   Reichstag  of   1893   Protestation  took  new   forms.  One socialist  deputy  was  elected,  and  the   Catholic  deputies  from Alsace-Lorraine  joined   the   Centre.

Political  Development  of   Germany  in   the   Nineteenth  Century. - The  people  of   Germany,  when  released  from  the   French  invasion, were   sufficiently   uniform  in   language  and   customs  to   feel themselves  one  nation  and  to   desire  political  unity.  But  they had   not  all   reached  the   same  stage   of   political   advancement  and they   were  subject  to  governments  that  were  hostile  to  union. The  west,  revolutionized  by   France,  had   a   democratic  social  system, free   from   clerical  control,  and   an  administration  subject   to law;   they   needed  only   representative  institutions  at   the   top.   The east,   retaining  eighteenth-century  conditions,  had  still   the   official power  of   the   nobles  and   clergy,   with   traditional  customs  and   administrative methods   that   would   ill   accord  with   any   other   government than   that   of   an   absolute,   aristocratic  monarchy.  Now, the   two   dominant  governments,  Austria  and  Prussia,  both  having their   political   centre  in   the   east,   checked,  by   their   absolutist and  aristocratic  polity,   the   development  of   Germany  toward  a liberal  system.  By   their  rivalry   they   checked  progress  toward unity.  This  double  clash  between  the   democratic  west  and  the aristocratic  east,  and   between  Austria  and  Prussia,  explains  the confused  and  conflicting  agitations  and   the   evolution  of   German political  life   in   the   nineteenth  century.

For  more  than  thirty   years   (1814-48)  political  life   was  centred in   the   west.  A   number  of   small  monarchies,  with  liberal  constitutions copied   from   France,   were   formed  in   that   region.   Their natural  destiny   seemed  to   be   to   form  a   federation  of   small  parliamentary states   like   Belgium.  During   this   time  Prussia,  by organizing  her   army  on  a   democratic  principle  and  by   building

up   the   Customs  Union,  was  preparing  the   means  for   obtaining a   military   and   economic  supremacy  in   Germany.

The  revolution  of   1848   consisted  in   two   democratic  outbreaks of   the   French  sort   in   the   two  absolutist  capitals,  and   an  attempt of   all   German  Liberals  to   form  a   national  union  by   means  of   a democratic  federal  assembly.  The  two  risings  compelled  the governments  of   Vienna  and  Berlin  to   accept   democratic  liberal constitutions;  the  federal  assembly  adopted  one  for   Germany. But  the  absolute  sovereigns  presently  swept  away  with  their armies  the   new  democratic  regime   and   got   rid   of   the   new  constitutions by   coups   d'etat.  The  Emperor  of   Austria  cancelled  his; the   King   of   Prussia  mutilated  his   to   the   point   of   making   it   little more  than  a   form  of   governmental  procedure.  The  democratic federal  constitution  was  brushed  aside  by   Prussian  troops,  in   a movement  that  also  broke  up   the   Republican  party  of   the   west. From  this   whole  abortive  experiment  of   1848   there  remained  in Prussia  a  wreck  of   a   democratic  constitution  and  the   independence of   the   Catholic  Church ;   there  remained  also   a   plan   of   German unity,   elaborated  by   the   Smaller  Germany  party   in   1849  - a federal  empire,  from  which  Austria  should  be   excluded,  governed by   the   King   of   Prussia  with   a   democratic  assembly  representing all   Germany. man

When  the   absolutist  and   anti-union  reaction  came  to   an  end   in 1859,   political  life   began   again   in   two  parallel   movements,  the one  toward  liberal  parliamentary  government,  the   other  toward a   union  of   all   Germany,  including  Austria.  The   two  movements were  abruptly  checked  by   the   personal  action  of   Bismarck.  Relying on   the   King   of   Prussia  and   the   Prussian  army,   he   imposed on  Prussia  the  monarchical  solution  of   the  parliamentary struggle  and   on   Germany  the   Prussian  solution  of   German  unity formulated  in   1849.   Both  solutions  were  compromises  between the   popular  wishes  and  the   royal   power,   but   compromises  dictated by   the   King   of   Prussia,  who   reserved  for   himself  the   greater share  of   the   advantage.

The  German  Empire,  a  compromise  between  a   federation  of the   German  nation  and  annexation  of   Germany  to   Prussia,  was made  up   of   German  states  and  of   Prussian  conquests  old   and new,   inhabited  in   part   by   aliens  (Poles,   Danes,  and   Alsace-Lorrainers) ; it   was  put   under  the   government  of   the   King   of   Prussia. Germania,  it   was  said,   is   a   daughter  of   Borussia,  not  of   Teutonic, (ancient  Germany).

The  constitutional  system  in   Prussia  and   in   the   Empire  is   a

compromise  between  the   liberal  democracy  of   1848   and   the   absolute monarchy  of   old   Prussia.  It   is   a   personal  government  of the   King,   who   retains  all   his   bureaucratic  and   military   apparatus, slightly   controlled  by   a   democratic  representative  assembly.

In   this   imperial   democratic  system,  parties   have  not  succeeded in   constituting  themselves  with  the   same  gradation  as   in   the other  great   Continental  states.  The   continuous  chain  which  elsewhere extends  from   the   Catholic  extreme  Right   to   the   socialist extreme  Left,  is   broken  in   Germany  by   the   absence  of   the   radical republican  party,  which  was  exterminated  in   1849   an&lt;^   ls  represented only   by   the   wreck  called  the   People's  party.  The  elements which   would  normally  belong   to   a   radical  party   are  therefore obliged   to   join   the   socialists,  who   thus   acquire   exceptional strength.  On  the   other  hand,   the   Right   is   twofold,  for   the   socalled  "   Centre  "   is   politically  a   Catholic  Right,   a   pendant   of   the Protestant  Conservative  Right,  both  of   them  champions  of   a monarchy  in   alliance  with  the   Church.

German  society,  since  the   founding  of   the   Empire,   seems  drawn in   two  opposite  directions  by   two  conflicting  tendencies.  The one  is   monarchical,  bureaucratic,  and  military;  springing  from the   Prussian  government,  it   tends  to   mould  all   Germany  on   the Prussian  model,  by   extending  to   it   the   old   regime   of   divine  right and  ecclesiastical  authority.  The  other  tendency  is   democratic, springing  from  the   new  populations  of   the   great   cities  and   manufacturing districts,   but   now   beginning   to   extend  to   the   rural   sections and   to   affect   even   the   Conservatives  through   the   Agrarian, Anti-Semitic,  and  Christian  Social  agitations.  Between  these two  tendencies - the   one  monarchical,  ecclesiastical,  and   military, incarnate  in   William  II.;   the   other  democratic,  anti-clerical,  and industrial - the   contradiction  is   so  evident  that  it   brings   on  the whole  political  life   of   Germany  a   confused  but   undeniable  unrest.*

*The  German  Empire  has  become  since  1871  the  second  country  of Europe  in   industry  and   commerce*  and  begins  to   compete  with  England  in the   production  of   coal,   iron,   and  fabrics.  The  total  population  has  risen from  42,000,000  in   1875   to   52,000,000  in   1895.   The  total  urban  population has,   in   the   same  period,  increased  from  36   per   cent,  to   47   per   cent,  of   the whole.  The  population  of   Berlin  has  trebled  in   thirty   years  ;   it   was 500,000  in   1860.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.*

*   On   the   character  of   this   bibliography,  see  chap.   xii.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.- See  Waitz,  "   Quellenktmde,"  up   to  1894;   for   very recent  works,  the  periodical  bibliog.  of   the  "Deutsche  Zeitschrift  fur Geschichtswissenschaf  t. "

DOCUMENTS.- For  collections,  same  bibl.  as  for  chap,  xv.- The principal  documents  are  parliamentary  reports,  Hahn, Kohl;  in   addition, Foschinger,  "   Documente  zur   Gesch.  der   Wirthschaftspolitik  in   Preussen  und im   Deutschen  Reich,"  5   vols.,  1889-91,  collection  for   the   history  of   Bismarck's ideas   and   political   economy.

For  practical  use,  important  documents  will  be   found  in   Schulthess' "   Geschichtskalender,"  edited  by   Delbriick,  from  1885   to   1894.- To   the   reviews  already  mentioned  ("   Grenzboten,  Preuss.  Jahrbucher")  add  the "Deutsche  Rundschau,"  since  1874,  liberal;  "Deutsche  Revue,"  since 1877;  "Die  Neue  Zeit,"  since  1883,  socialist.- Mueller,  "Das  Jahr,"  pub. yearly  since  1875.

WORKS.- The  complete  histories  go  only   to   1890.- Oncken,  "   Zeitalter des   K.   Wilhelm,  vol.  ii.,   1892   (Oncken  coll.)   a   scientific  popular  work, stops  at   1888.- H.Bltun,  "Das  Deutsche  Reich  zur  zeit  Bismarcks,"  1893, goes   to   1890;   Blum  is   an   intimate  friend  of   Bismarck.- The  "   Geschichtskalender "   gives   at   the   end   of   each   volume  a   political  review  of   the   year, from  the   point   of   view  of   the   National-Liberals.

On  Bismarck  see  his  own  "   Gedanken  und  Erinnerungen,"  2  vols., 1898;   Eng.   tr.   by   A.   J.   Butler,  1899.  Busch,  "   Bismarck:  Some  Secret Pages  of   his  History,"  2  vols.,  1898.   Eng.   tr.   by   Macmillan;  "   Unser Reichskanzler,"  2  vols.,  1884,  Eng.   tr.  "Our  Chancellor";  and  the series  of   studies  signed  ***   (Waitz,  "   Quellenk.,"  No.  6461).  In   English, Lowe,   "   Life  of   Bismarck,"  2  vols.,  rather  journalistic. - The  biographies of   William  I.,   (W.   Muller,  1888;  L.Hahn,  1888)   are  the  work  of hero-worshippers.

In   French:  E.Simon,  "   L'Empereur  Guillaume,"  1886. - Lavisae,  "   Trois Empereurs  d'Allemagne,"  1888.

ON  THE  CULTURKAMPF  :   L. Halm,  "Gesch.  des  Kulturkampfes  in   Preussen," 1881,   collection  of   documents,  prot.   and  governmental.- F.-X. Schulte,  "   Gesch.  des  Kulturk.  in   Preussen,"  1882,   Catholic.- MajuntaB, "   Gesch.  des   Kulturk.  in   Preussen  und  Deutschland,"  1876-88,  Catholic.

ON  INSTITUTIONS  :   Marquardsen,  "   Handbuch  des   Offentlichen  Rechts  der Gegenwart,"  vols.  i.   and  iii.,   detailed  description  of   the   government  and administration  of   the  Empire  and  of   each  of   the  States. - For  Prussia, Bornhak,  "Gesch.  des  Preussischen  Verwaltungsrechts,"  suppl.  1892.Ronne,  "   Staatsrecht  der   Preussischen  Monarchic,"  4   vols.,  latest  edit,  and the   suppl.   of   Schoen,   "   Recht  der   Kommunalverbande  in   Preussen"  (1897), for   the   latest  reforms.- In   English,  W.   H.   Dawson,  "Germany  and   the   Germans," 2   vols.,   1894;   Lowell,  "Governments  and  Parties  in   Continental Europe,"  2   vols.,   1897.

ON  SOCIAL  LEGISLATION  :   Detailed  articles  and  special   bibl.  in   "   Handworterbuch  der  Staatswissenschaften."

ON   THE   SOCIALIST  PARTY  :   See   bibl.   to   chap,   xxiv.

## CHAPTER   XVII.

## THE    CONSTITUTIONAL    SYSTEM    IN   AUSTRIA.

AFTER  the   war  with  Italy,   Austria  emerged  from  her   absolutism, but,   before  becoming  the   constitutional  dual  monarchy  of Austro-Hungary,  she  passed  through  a  critical  period,  from 1859   to   1867,   during   which  even  the   constitution  of   the   monarchy remained  in   a   provisional  and   precarious  condition,  many  times transformed  and  always  contested  by   some  of   the   nations  subject to   the   Emperor.  It   is   a   short  period   in   the   history   of   Austria, but   very   clearly   marked  and   decisive,  between  the   old   centralized absolutist  system  and   the   Austro-Hungary  of   the   present   day.

## FORMATION    OF    AUSTRO-HUNGARY.

The  Constitution  of   October,  1860. - The  absolutist  system,  restored in   1849,   fell   in   the   disastrous  Italian  war  of   1859;   the   government itself   had   to   recognise   the   necessity   of   abandoning  it. For  a   long   time  the   government  had   existed  with  a   chronic  deficit, which   it   covered  by   loans.  After  its   defeat,  when  it   wished to   reorganize  the   army,   it   found  its   credit  gone   (in   1860   only   75,000,000  florins  were  subscribed  in   response  to   a   call   for   a   loan   of 200,000,000).  Evidently  the  subjects  had  lost  their  interest  in state  affairs,  in   which  they   had   no  part   whatever.  To   revive public   life   the   people   must   be   given   a   share  in   the   government.

The  Emperor,  immediately  after  the   end   of   the   war,  recognised in   a   manifesto  (August,  1859)   the   "   hereditary  abuses  "   whicli had   caused  the   defeat,   and   before  issuing   the   loan   of   1860   he   determined to   appeal  directly  to   his   subjects,  asking   their  aid   in exchange  for  liberal  reforms.  He  announced  that  he   would grant  representation  to  the   various  provinces  of   the   monarchy. Meanwhile  he   convoked  a   "   re-enforced  Council  of   State  "   (verst'drkter  Reichsrath),  comprising  the   ordinary  members  of   the Council  of   State,   a   number  of   dignitaries,  and   38   notables  (including several  grand   seigneurs)  chosen  from  the   different  countries in   such   manner  that   all   were  represented.

518

This  Council,  where  the   office-holders  and   aristocracy  predominated, was   to   give   its   opinion   especially   on   financial  questions  and the   most  important  laws,   but   it   had   no  right   of   proposing  measures. Austrians  regarded  it   simply   as  an   instalment  of   the promised  reforms.  The  notables  that  were  summoned,  even  the Hungarian  nobles,  attended  the   meetings,  but  simply  as  a  mark of   their   good-will.  Further,  it   was  necessary,  in   order  to   induce them  to   come,  to   re-establish  a  single   governor  instead  of   four, and  to   promise  the   restoration  of   the   county   "   congregations  " (assemblies),  as   before  the   reaction  of   1849.

In   the   "   re-enforced  council  "   the   Hungarians  declared  "   that they   did   not  regard   themselves  as  representative  Hungarians, that   they   reserved  the   historic  rights   of   Hungary,  and   counted  on the   Emperor  to   find   a   means  of   abandoning  the   special   system." A   committee  was  then  appointed  to  examine  the  budget.  It unanimously  condemned  "   the  system  of   internal  organization in   the   monarchy"  and   demanded  that  "the  different  countries should  share  in   the   administration  of   their  affairs,"  as   the   only means  of   effecting  economies  and  especially  of   combating  "   that numbness  of   public   spirit   which  paralyzes  the   moral  force  of   the state." But  on   the   organization  of   this   administration  by   the   countries themselves  the   committee  was  divided,  and   from  the   time  of   this first   assembly,  though  so  narrow  and  so   little  representative, two  parties  appeared,  the  Unitarian  and  the   federalist,  whose strife  was  henceforth  to  rule  political  life  in   the  Austrian monarchy.

The  Unitarian  party   had   its   chief  force  in   the   middle  classes  of the   German  provinces,  for   "   the   maintenance  of   the   unity   of   the monarchy  "   meant  government  by   the  German  administration established  in   Vienna;  this   was  the   party   of   the   cities  and   manufacturing regions,   which   had   need   of   a   strong   central  government to   make  liberal  reforms  and   to   restore  a   lay   regime   in   spite   of   the clergy.  They   had  for  allies  the   representatives  of   the   little nations,  who  needed  a  central  government  to  protect  them against  their  stronger  neighbours;  in   1860  there  were  no  small nations  represented  except  those  of   Hungary:  the   Servians,  and the   Saxons  in   Transylvania;  but   the   others,  when  they   should get   a   voice   in   the   assemblies,  were  sure  to   pursue  the   same  policy.

The  federalist  party   was  mainly   composed  of   nations  that   were strong  enough  to   hope   for   national  governments  independent  of the   centre:  Magyars,  Croats,  Czechs,  Poles,  and   Slovens  (in   1860

the   Italians  of   Venetia).  It   demanded  the   historic  rights,   that   is to   say,   the   independence  enjoyed  by   the   nation  before  its   union with  the   monarchy,  and  wished  to  weaken  if   not  suppress  the common  administration  and  reduce  the   monarchy  to  a   federation of   nations.  As   the   aristocratic  form  of   society   still   prevailed, each   nation  was  represented  almost  solely   by   its   nobles  and   higher clergy.  The  federalist  party   was  also   an  old-regime  party,   invoking historic  rights   in   order  to   return  to   the   old   aristocratic  government of   the   nation  and   wishing  to   maintain  the   domination  of nobility  and   clergy.  Its   allies  in   the   German  province  were  the old-regimists, - the   lords,   who  opposed  the   bourgeoisie,  and   the clergy,   who   opposed  purely   lay   government.

The  committee  split   into   a   majority  and   a   minority;  each   presented its   report,  in   which  already  it   made  use  of   expressions which  were  destined  to   become  classic  in   Austria.*

The  federalist  majority  (25   votes,  of   which  13   belonged  to nobles,  3   to   bishops)  demanded  "   recognition  of   the   historicopolitical  individualities  of   the   particular  countries,"  "   equality  of all   the   countries  within  the   monarchy,"  and   for   each   "   autonomy in   administration  and  internal  legislation."  It   advised  that  reform should  be   confined  as  much  as  possible   to   "   previous  institutions." The   Unitarian  minority  (13   votes)   demanded  that home  rule  should  not  be   granted  "   at   the   expense  of   imperial unity   and   a   strong  central  imperial  power,"  and   that   in   granting local  powers  "   those  rights   should  be   reserved  to   the   united  state and  to  the   imperial  government,  without  which  true  imperial unity   cannot  be   conceived."  It   advised  the   Emperor  to   establish these   institutions  "   by   virtue  of   his   own  full   power,"  consequently to   present  them  as  granted  in   opposition  to   the   theory of   historical  rights,   which  demanded  them  as   the   restoration  of an  old   national  right.   It   neglected  to   define  the   institutions  to be   created,  not   daring   to   speak   of   a   "   constitution,"  which  was then  regarded  as  revolutionary.

The  Emperor  at   first   followed  the   advice  of   the   majority.  By the   diploma  of   October  20,  1860,   he   granted  a   "   fundamental state   law,   permanent  and   irrevocable."  This  diploma  recognised in   the   Diets  of   the   various  countries  the   power  of   voting   laws,   in accordance  with  historic  forms.  "   In   the   countries  under  the crown  of   Hungary,  action  must  be   in   conformity  with  their  pre-

*   The  majority  of   these  expressions,  composed  in   the  philosophic  language of   the  German  political  law,   cannot  well  be   translated  correctly into  French.

vious  constitutions  "  ; in   the   others,   in   conformity  with   their   local ordinances.  For  the   case  of   laws   common  to   the   whole  Empire, and  especially  on   financial  matters  (taxes,  loans,  budgets,  and accounts)  an   Imperial  Council  of   100  members  was  instituted, composed  of   delegates  from  the   various  Diets.  The  Emperor abolished  the   common  ministers  of   interior,  justice,   and   education and   re-established  the   chancelleries  of   Hungary  and   Transylvania. He   declared  that   institutions  must  "   correspond  to   the consciousness  of   historic  rights   "   of   his   "   kingdoms  and   nations." This  was  the   official  recognition  of   the   federalist  theory.

The  Constitution  of   1861. - This  first  federalist  constitution lasted  four  months.  The  Hungarians,  restored  to   the   possession of   their   constitution,  declared  null  all   acts   done  by   the   government without  the   consent  of   their   Diet   since  1848.   They   recognised no   other   constitution  but   that   of   '48,   no  other  laws   but those  of   '48,   the   only   ones   legally   established  by   agreement  between the   Diet   and   the   King.   Now  the   regime   of   1848   made Hungary  an  entirely  independent  state,   joined   to   Austria  by   a simply  personal  union.  The  .Emperor  did   not  wish  to   go   so   far, since  he   created  a   legislative  assembly  common  to   all   the   states, including  Hungary;  but   in   restoring  the   Hungarian  constitution he   had   forgotten  to   fix   limits  to   what   he   granted   them. nised

The  Hungarians  immediately  conducted  themselves  as   if   the Constitution  of   '48   were  still   in   force.  The   counties  organized themselves,  and  conducted  elections  according  to  the  laws  of 1848,   in   spite   of   the   government  circulars  issued  to   them,   which they   received  and   "   deferentially  "   set   aside.  The   people   refused to   pay   taxes  (because  they   were  not  voted  by   the   Diet)   or   to obey   Austrian  magistrates.  The  imperial  government  and  governors of   the   counties  had   no  means  of   opposing  this   general movement.  The  Emperor  complained  of  the  condition  of affairs  and  threatened  not  to  convoke  the  Diet  again.  The counties  replied   with  an  address  demanding  the   complete  restoration of   the   laws   of   '48   and   full   amnesty   for   all   who   had   taken   part in   the   revolution  (January,  1861).

Schmerling,  the   new  minister  of   the   interior  (December,  1860), had  just   promised  that  the   other  countries  in   the   monarchy should  have  Diets  chosen  by   direct  election,  with  public   sessions and  the   right   of   proposing  laws  - which  meant  a  constitutional government  for  each  country.  But  the   liberal  bourgeoisie  desired a   like  system  for   the   general  government.  The  minister of   finance  consulted  the   chambers  of   commerce  on   the   means  of

522  THE   CONSTITUTIONAL   SYSTEM  IN  AUSTRIA.

raising  the   very   low   value  of   paper  money;  all   replied   that   a "   real   constitution  "   was  the   only   way  of   curing   "   hereditary abuses/' The  Emperor,  unwilling  to   yield   to   Hungary  and   worried  over the  financial  situation,  adopted  the  advice  of   the  unitary minority  and  promulgated  a  new  constitution,  the   "   patent  "   of February  26,   1861,  which,  while  pretending  to  complete  the diploma  of   1860,   replaced  it   with  an  altogether  different  system. Each  country  was  to   keep   its   Diet,   organized  by   a   special   ordinance; Venetia  and   the   countries  under  the   crown  of   Hungary were  not  included.  In   the   other  countries  the   Diet  was  to   be elected,  according  to   class  divisions,  by   three  bodies  of   electors as   the   Prussian  Provincial  Estates  were  before  1848,  - large   landowners, cities,   and   rural   districts, - so  as   to   give   a   strong   preponderance to   the   landed  aristocracy.  But   the   Imperial  council became  an  actual  annual  parliament  of   the   monarchy,  comprising two  Chambers.  The  House  of   Lords  was  composed  of   a   number of   dignitaries  and   hereditary  lords  appointed  by   the   Emperor. The  House  of   Representatives  was  to   have  343   members  chosen by   the   local   Diets  (Hungary  85,   Transylvania  20,   Croatia  9,   Bohemia 54,   Moravia  22,   Galicia  38),   reserving  to   the   government the   right   of   having   them   directly   elected  if   necessary,  by   electoral bodies;  this   provided  for   the   case  of   a   Diet   refusing   to   elect.

The   Emperor  promulgated  "this  collection  of   fundamental  laws as   the   Constitution  of   his   Empire   "   and   promised  that   he   and   his successors  should  "   maintain  it   inviolable  "   and   that,   at   each  accession, a   special   oath  to   this   effect  should  be   made  by   proclamation. By   this  granted  constitution  Austria  became  a  constitutional monarchy  after  the   Tory   conception:  the   Emperor  to choose  his   ministers  at   will   and   retain  absolute  control  of   the government;  the  council  to   have  power  Ciily   to   vote  laws  and the   budget,   like   the   Chambers  of   Louis  XVIII. tion.

Attempt  at   a   Unitary  Government  (1861-65). - The  Constitution of   1861  answered  the   wishes  of   the   unitary  party,  and   received the   support   of   the   German  liberals  and   the   small  nations  : Serbs  and   Roumans,  under  the   crown  of   Hungary;  Ruthenians  in Galicia,  and   Croats  in   Dalmatia.  It   displeased  the   aristocratic federalist  party,  and   the   strongly  constituted  nations,  by   subjecting them   to   an  assembly  common  to   the   whole  Empire,  and   the old-regimists  by   establishing  a   liberal  constitutional  system.

But  the  coalition  that  had  composed  the  majority  in   1860 broke  up.   The  more  independent  nations  declared  the   constitu-

tion   contn contrary  to   their  historic  rights;   consequently  they   refused to   elect   delegates  to   the   Reichsrath;  the   Magyars,  the   Italians  in Venetia,  and  the   Croats  held  no  elections  and  were  not  represented. But   the   other   federalist  nations  did   not  at   first   dare   to adopt   such  a   radical  policy;   the   Poles,   Czechs,  and   Slovenians sent  their  deputies,  but   held  to   their  historic  rights.  (In   Istria and   Transylvania  the   Diets  had   first   refused;  the   government,  by dissolving  the   Diet   and   changing  the   electoral  law,   secured  a   majority in   favour  of   holding  an  election).  The  Tyrol,   where  the clerical  party  predominated,  protested  against  equality  in   creed, and  demanded  the   prohibition  of   Protestantism,  but  sent  delegates nevertheless.  The   decisive  action  was  taken  by   the   great landowners,  who  were  very  strongly  represented  in   the   Diets. They   deserted  their  federalist  allies  to   obey   the   government.  The Reichsrath  was  not  complete;  it   lacked  140   deputies,  but   it   was sufficiently  large   to   take   legal   action  as   the   "   narrower  council  " for   the   non-Hungarian  part   of   the   Empire.  Later,  in   1863, when  the   government  had  organized  the   Diet  of   Transylvania, the   Saxons,  who  were  opposed  to   the   Magyars,  sent  their  deputies to   the   Reichsrath,  and   the   Emperor  declared  it   constituted  as the   "   larger   council,"  competent  to   direct  the   affairs  of   the   whole monarchy.

The  constitutional  system  began  with  a   German  ministry under  Schmerling,  who  had  been  an   imperial  minister  in   1848, an  old   liberal  and   German  patriot.  His   policy   was  marked  particularly by   liberal  and  German  declarations.  This  was  the period  of   negotiations  with  the   German  states  (1863;   see  p.   465). The  House  of   Representatives  of   the   Reichsrath,  where  the   majority was   German,   approved  this   policy   and   voted  an  address begging  the   Emperor  to   tighten  the   tie   with  the   German  states.

This  system  at   first   met  with   resistance  from  nations  unwilling to   be   governed  by   Germans,  then  from  the   Germans  themselves who  did   not   find   the   government  sufficiently  liberal.  ·

The  national  resistance  began  in   Venetia  and  in   Hungary. The  Central  Congregation,  or  provincial  assembly  of   Venetia,  refused to   send   its   delegates   (1861).   The   Hungarian  Diet,   convoked by   the   government  at   Ofen  (opposite  Pesth),   consented  to hold  a   meeting.  But   immediately,  on   the   question  of   the   answer to   be   made  to   the   Emperor,  it   broke  into   two  almost  equal   parties. One   wanted  to   reply   by   a   decision  of   the   Diet   indicating  that Hungary  would  not  consent  even  to   a   discussion,  but   demanded the   restoration  of   the   Constitution  of   '48.   The   other,   directed

## 524  THE   CONSTITUTIONAL   SYSTEM  IN  AUSTRIA.

by   the   old   liberals,   Deak  and   Eotvos,  proposed  to   adopt   the   more conciliatory  form  of   an  address  to   the   King   protesting  against   the new  constitution.  After  three  weeks  of   discussion  the   "   address party"  won  the   victory  over  the   "decision  party"  (155   votes against  152).   But   the   address  was   drafted  in   the   form  of   a   decision; instead   of   addressing  itself   to   the   King   (according  to   Hungarian custom)   the   Diet   used   the   term   "   Most  gracious  lord,"   indicating that   it   did   not  recognise  the   abdication  of   Ferdinand  and Francis  Joseph's  accession.  The  Emperor  refused  to   receive  the address.  The  Diet  consented  to  adopt   the   form  of   1790,   but   at the   same  time  declared  that   "   the   King   of   Hungary  could  legally become  King   only   by   coronation,"  and   that   coronation  rested  on certain  previous  conditions:  i.   The  union  of   the   countries  under the   crown  of   Hungary  (Croatia  and   Transylvania),  whose  deputies should   sk   in   the   Hungarian  Diet ;   2.   The   "   complete  restoration of   the   fundamental  laws,"  which  meant  the   Constitution  of '48;   3.   The   "restoration  of   the   parliamentary  system  with  a   responsible ministry."   As   for   the   general   constitution,  which  made Hungary  "   an   Austrian  province,"  under  "   a   body   chiefly   foreign," the   Diet  refused  it   as  contrary  to   "the  contract  concluded  between the   nation   and   the   reigning   dynasty."  It   declared  that   it would  never  "   sacrifice  the   constitutional  independence  of   the   nation for   any   sort   of   consideration  or   interests  "   (July,   1861);   that it   "   could  not  make  the   Hungarian  government  dependent  upon any  other  than  the   King   of   Hungary  ";   that   it   would  not   join   in any  general  representation  of   the   monarchy,  and  consented  only to  negotiate  each  question  with  the  peoples  of   the  hereditary states  as  one   independent  nation  with  other  independent nations.

Neither  of   the   two  sides  wished  to   negotiate  until  it   should have  secured  from  the   other  the   formal  recognition  of   its   right: the  Hungarians  their  historic  constitution,  the  Emperor  his granted  constitution;  the  two  rights  being   mutually  contradictory, the   negotiation  ended  in   an  official  rupture.  The  government returned  to   its   policy   of   repression  as  a   provisional system,  to   wear  out  the   patience  of   the   Hungarians.  But   the Hungarians  did   not  yield,   and   the   system  remained  in   force  until 1866.  The  Croats  also  refused  to   join   the   Reichsrath,  as   long   as the   government  refused  them  union  with  Dalmatia.

The  less   strongly  organized  nations,  Poles  and   Czechs,  who had   begun   by   joining   in   the   Reichsrath,  gradually  changed  their policy.  It   seemed  to   them  more  advantageous  to   imitate  the

Hungarians.  The  Poles  withdrew  from  the  Reichsraih;  the Czechs,  after  winning  the  majority  in   the   Bohemian  Landtag, refused  to   send  their  delegates.  There  remained  in   the   Reichsrath  only   Germans  and  representatives  of   the   little  nations.

Meanwhile  the   ministry  disagreed  even  with  the   German  party in   the   Reichsrath,  principally  on   its   financial  policy;   the   deficit continued,  the   debt  increased,  and  the   ministry  was  obliged  to confess  that  it   had   concealed  the   deficit  by   cooking  of   the   accounts. The   German  liberal  party   reproached  the   ministry  with having  reduced  the   constitutional  system  to   a   fiscal  process,  to obtain  money.  The  Chamber  demanded  first  a   balanced  budget (1864),   then  a   reduction  in   expenses  (1865),   and   finally   refused to   sanction  a   loan.

Suspension  of   the   Constitution. - The   Emperor  had  accepted the   Constitution  of   1861  in   order  to   maintain  unity   between  his states  and   to   aid   his   government  to   perform   its   offices.  The   system worked  badly   in   one  part   of   the   monarchy;  in   the   other  the population  refused  it,   and   it   was   impossible  even  to   convoke  an assembly  of   representatives  of   the   empire.  The  Reichsrath,  so far   from  aiding   the   ministers,  hindered  them  by   demanding  accounts. The   Emperor,   disgusted  with   this   failure,   returned  to the   Austrian  tradition  of   dualism.  Finding  in   Hungary  a   distinct nation   too   independent  to   enter  a   centralized  monarchy,  the Emperor  resigned  himself  to   its   separation  from  the   rest  of   the monarchy,  that  he   might   have  it   for   an  ally.

Then  began  negotiations  with  the  Hungarians  to  reconcile their  historic  rights   with   imperial   unity.   In   order  to   avoid  being interfered  with  during   these  negotiations,  the   Emperor  got   rid   of the   Reichsrath,  the   German  liberal  ministry  (July   27),   and   finally the   constitution.  He  declared  (September  20)   that,   "   having decided  to   come  to   an  understanding  with  the   legal   representatives of   his   peoples   in   the   eastern  regions,"  he   found  it   "   necessary to   suspend  (sistiren)  the   constitution."  The   suspension  was announced  as  provisional.  But  the   new  ministry  (Belcredi)  was composed  of   nobles  of   the   aristocratic  party.   So   the   suspension was  denounced  as  a  coup   d'etat  by   German  liberals  and  was received  with  joy   by   the   federalists  in   Poland  and   Bohemia,  and the   Catholic  party   in   the   Tyrol.   The   Hungarian  and   Croatian Diets  were  convoked  to   discuss  the   conditions  of   the   agreement; the   Empire  recognised  the   laws  of   '48   in   principle,  on  condition that   the   Diet   should  revise  them  in   accordance  with   the   recmirements  of   unity.   The   negotiations  began   in   December,  1865,   but

were  interrupted  by   the   war  of   1866,   and   were  not  completed until  1867.

It   became  necessary  to   choose  between  two  systems:  dualism, which  would  divide  the   Empire  between  two  nations  only   (the crown  of   St.   Stephen  for   the   Magyars,  the   imperial  crown  for the   Germans);  and  federalism,  which  would  break  it   up   into  an indefinite  number  of   states.  xThe   ministry  promptly  decided  in favour  of   the   federalists,  and  convoked  a  special  Reichsrath, where  the   majority  was  federalist.  But  the   members  from  the German  countries  refused  to  take  their  seats,  so  the   Reichsrath found  itself  no   longer   large   enough   to   discuss  the   compromise to   be   concluded  with  Hungary.

It   was  the   former  prime   minister  of   Saxony,  von   Buest,   who, having  entered  the  service  of   Austria  after  the  war  of   1866, induced  the  Emperor  to  renounce  federalism.  The  Beust ministry  (February,  1867)   put   an  end   to   the   suspension  by   establishing dualism  and   the   constitutional  system.

The  Hungarian  Compromise. - The  compromise  (Ausgleich)  of 1867   was  the   first   work  of   the   new  government.  It   cut  the   Empire into   two   states,   strictly   equal   in   rights,   both   subject   to   the same  sovereign,  though  under  two  different  titles,  Emperor  of Austria  and  apostolic  King   of   Hungary,  with  the   same  flag   (the imperial  eagle).  The  monarchy  officially  adopted  the  double title   of   Austria-Hungary.  The  division  was  made  according  to historic  traditions:  the  state  of   Hungary  was  composed  of the   countries  under  the   crown  of   St.   Stephen  (Hungary,  Croatia, Slavonia,  Transylvania,  Servia,  and  the  military  frontier),  the state  of   Austria  including  all   the  rest  (17   provinces).  The two  groups  were  designated  by   names  already  in   use,   Cisleithania (Austria)  and   Transleithania  (Hungary).  These  were  exact  geographical terms   when   applied   to   the   province   of   Austria  and   the kingdom  of   Hungary,  which  were  separated  by   the   Leitha  river, but   have  become  purely  conventional  by   extension  to  all   the countries  joined   to   Austria,  of   which  several  (Galicia,  Bukovina) are  east  of   the   Leitha.  Each  of   the   two  states  comprised  a   ruling race,  which  gave   the   government  its   national  character,  German in   Cisleithania,  Magyar  in   Transleithania,  and  several  small peoples,  mainly  Slavs,  less  strongly  organized  and  less  civilized. Beust   is   said   to   have  remarked  to  the  Hungarian ministry  :   "   Take  care  of   your   barbarians,  we  will   take  care  of ours." The  two  states  were  joined,  not   by   a   simply   personal  union,

as   in   1848,   but   by   a   common  government  directing  common affairs.     These  affairs  were  of   two  sorts  :

1.   Affairs  common  to   the   two   halves  of   the   Empire  were  reduced to   three  classes  : foreign   affairs,   army  and   navy   (except   the fixing   of   the   number  of   troops  and   the   regulation  of   military service),  and  finances  connected  with   the   common  expenses. These  subjects  were  assigned  to  three  imperial  ministers,  in theory  responsible  at   once  to   the   parliaments  of   both   states.

2.   Affairs  to   be   settled  on  common  principles  by   agreements made  from  time  to  time  (commerce,  customs  tariffs,  currency, military  system,  and   factory   legislation).

For  the   management  of   affairs  of   the   first   class,   the   compromise of   1867   establishes,  side   by   side   with   the   common  ministry, the   institution  known  as   the   delegations.  These  are  two   bodies of   delegates  from  the   two  parliaments,  60   from  each,   of   whom 40   are   in   each   case  chosen  by   the   lower  house  and   20   by   the upper  house.  In   order  to  maintain  the  equality  of   the  two halves,  it   was  agreed   that   the   delegations  should  meet  alternately at   Vienna  and  at   Buda-Pesth.  The  two  delegations  sit   separately, deliberating  each   in   its   own   language,  and   communicating only   by   written  messages;  if   they   do   not  succeed  in   coming to   an  agreement  they   meet  together,  but   simply   to   vote,  without debate.  The  delegations  are  not  a   legislature;  their  chief function  is   to   control  the   expenditure  for   the   common  purposes, and  to   exert  a   parliamentary  influence  over  the   common  ministry. They   have   no  power  of   taxation:  the   money  needed  for covering  such  expenditures  as   they   approve  is   raised,  under  apportionment, by   the   two   halves  of   the   monarchy.

Affairs  of   the   second  class - those  regulated  according  to identical  principles - do   not  come  within  the   field  of   the   delegations. They   are  settled  by   agreements  or  contracts,  negotiated from   time   to   time   between  the   two  ministries  (Austrian and  Hungarian)  and  later  carried  through  the   two  parliaments in   substantially  identical  form.

The  first  contract  established  a  system  of   common  customs tariff,   a   bank,   a   common  system  of   currency  (with   two   different issues),   and   weights   and   measures.  It   divided  the   previous  debt and  expenses  for   the   future;  Hungary  took  only   30   per   cent.

This  system  was  an  unprecedented  creation,  which  the   theorists were  at   a   loss   to   define.  It   was  not  a   federal  state   like   North Germany.  There  were  no  permanent  regulations  for   economic interests;  the   economic  matters  in   common  between  the   two

## 528  THE   CONSTITUTIONAL   SYSTEM  IN  AUSTRIA.

states,   determined  by   temporary  agreements  of   short  date,   were to   be   brought  up   for   settlement  periodically;  either  of   the   two parliaments  could  break  the   tariff  union,  destroy  the   bank,   unity in   economic  legislation,  and   even  unity   of   weights   and   measures. Nothing  was  to   be   permanent  but  the   diplomatic  and  military union,  and  even  this  is   not  perpetual.  Union  has  been  concluded, not   between  the   two  states,   but   between  each  of   them and  the   reigning  dynasty;  if   the   family   of   Lorraine  should  become extinct,   the   union  would  come  to   an  end   and   Hungary would  become  an  elective  kingdom.

The  Liberal  Constitutions  of   1867. - In   each  of   the   two  states the   compromise  was  accompanied  by   a  restoration  of   the   constitution and   elective  representation.

Hungary  received  the  Constitution  of   1848   again,   revised  by the   King's   request,  so   that   he   should  have  the   right   of   choosing all   the   ministers.  It   was  a   very   liberal  constitution,  similar  to the   Belgian.  The  King   swore  to   uphold  it.   It   guaranteed  all personal  and   political  liberties.  It   gave   the   executive  power  to a   responsible  ministry,  the   legislative  power  to   a   Diet  composed of   two   Chambers.  The  Chamber  of   Magnates  remained  aristocratic, composed  chiefly   of   hereditary  nobles  (more   than  800 members).  The  Chamber  of   Deputies,  which  became  in   fact   the principal  assembly,  was  composed  of   deputies  elected  by   public vote,  under  a   very  extended  suffrage - with  a   low   property  qualification and   very   wide   rights   of   voting   based  on  education  and occupation.  Ability  to   speak   Magyar  is   required.

In   Austria  the   Constitution  of   1861,   modified  by   the   "fundamental laws   "   of   1867,   became  also  a   liberal  and   parliamentary constitution.  The  law  "   on  the   general  rights   of   citizens  "   proclaimed equality,   according   to   the   revolutionary  formula:  "All citizens  are  equal   before  the   law ;   public   employments  are  equally open  to   all."  It   recognised  personal  and  political  liberties  according to   liberal  forms,   and   to   reassure  the   non-German  peoples, it   proclaimed  equality  of   language  and   race.*

The  Reichsrath  retained   its    organization,   with   a    House   of *   "   All   races  in   the   state  enjoy   equal   rights,   and   each  has   an  inviolable right   to   its   own  nationality  and  tongue.  The  equal  rights  (Gleichberechtigung)  of   all   the  languages  in   use  is   recognised  by   the  state  in school,  office,  and   public   life.  In   countries  peopled  by   a   number  of   races, public   educational  institutions  must  be   so  organized  that,   without  resorting to   constraint  to   compel  the   learning  of   another  language,  each  of these  races  shall  receive  the   necessary  privileges  of   instruction  in   their own  tongue."

Lords  and   a   House  of   Representatives  (203)   elected  by   the   Diets of   the   17   provinces.*  The  ministry  was  declared  responsible  to the   Reichsrath,  and  the   right   of   initiative  was  granted  to   that body.

The  power  was  divided  between  the   central  Reichsrath  and   the local  Diets,  so   that   the   Reichsrath  should  receive  all   that  was deemed  necessary  to  the  maintenance  of   unity,   not  simply  the powers  conferred  on  the  German  Reichstag  (common  budget, military  service,  commerce,  weights  and  measures,  credit,  transportation, public   health,   naturalization),  but   even  the   regulation of   the   freedom  of   the   press,  public   meetings,  association,  "   confessional relations,"  "   educational  principles"  criminal  justice, civil   and   commercial  rights,   and   organization  of   courts  and  administration. To   the   Diets  were  intrusted  "   all   other  objects   of legislation  not  expressly  reserved  to   the   Reichsrath."  The  constitution could   be   changed   only   by   a   two-thirds  majority  in   the Reichsrath.

Austria  became  a   liberal  constitutional  monarchy,  almost  parliamentary, with   a   representative  system   in   three   stages:   in   each of   the   17   provinces  a   Diet  (Landtag)  voting   the   laws  and   the budget  of   the   province ; for   Austria  the   Reichsrath;  for   the   whole Austro-Hungarian  monarchy  the   Delegations.

## AUSTRIA-HUNGARY.

Since  1867   Austria  and   Hungary  have  been  two   distinct  states: each  has   its   own  domestic  policy.  But  the   common  sovereign and  foreign  policy   maintain  between  them  a   joint   responsibility which  affects  even  their  domestic  policy.  I   shall,   therefore,  give a   parallel   presentation  of   their  history,   divided  into   two  periods by   an   historical  incident,  the   occupation  of   Bosnia  (1878),   which, though  outside  of   the   monarchy,  has   modified  the   internal  evolution of   both  states.

Conditions  of   Political  Life  in   Austria. - Cisleithania  was  still a  very   heterogenous  mixture  of   peoples.  Political  life,   after 1867,   continued  to   be   subject   to   strife   between  races;  parties   were essentially  national;  they   were  grouped  into   Centralists,  who   advocated the   common  government  under  German  officials,  and Federalists,  who  advocated  local  governments  under  Slavs

*   Bohemia  54,   Moravia  22,   Silesia  6,   Galicia  38,   Bukovina  5,   Dalmatia  5, Lower  Austria  18,   Upper  Austria  10,   Salzburg  3,   Styria  13,   Carinthia  5, Carniola  6,   Tyrol   10,   Vorarlberg  2,   Istria  2,   Goerz-Gradisca  2,   Trieste  2,

34

## 53°  THE   CONSTITUTIONAL   SYSTEM  IN  AUSTRIA.

(Czechs,  Poles,  Slovenians,  and  Croats).  The  Germans  broke into   political   parties   also:   the   old-regime  and   Catholic  party   (conservative), and   the   democratic,  anti-clerical  party   (liberal).

Political  life   was  greatly   complicated  by   the   fact   that   the   nations no   longer   corresponded  to   the   sharp   distinctions  of   race. "   Races,"  in   Austria-Hungary,  were  practically  distinguished only   by   language;  a   man's  nationality  depended  on  the   language he   usually  spoke;   part   of   the   Germans  are   Germanized  Slavs.* So   in   each  province  the   nations,  or  peoples  speaking  different tongues,  are  not   juxtaposed,  but   entangled  and  superposed.  In almost  all   the   countries  where  the   Slavs  predominated,  German remained  the   language  of   the   cities,   the   great   landlords,  and   educated men;   for   it   was  the   language  of   commerce,  the   court, science,  and  literature.  Italian  played  the   same  part  on  the Adriatic  coast.  There  were  countries  which  were  altogether German,  or  rather  Germanized,  and  exempt  from  this  national strife;   but   in   all   the   others  the   difference  in   tongue  created  enmity between  the   inhabitants  of   the   same  region,   often  of   the same  city   even.  The  struggle  was  therefore  carried  not  only into   the   Reichsrath,  on  questions  of   the   general   policy   of   the   monarchy, but   also   into   the   Diet   of   each   province,   on  questions   of   the rights   of   each  race,  which  in   reality   resolved  themselves  into rights   of   those  using   the   same  language.

The  constitution,  in   proclaiming  the  principle  of   "   equal rights   "   of   race  and   tongue   in   "   school,   office,   and   public   life," had  presented  the  language  question  without  settling  it.  In practice  it   was  possible  to   have  primary  schools  for   each  language (not   easily,   however,  in   the   villages   of   mixed  tongues  and in   the   cities   where  the   families  of   a   special   tongue   lived   far   apart). But  should  secondary  education  be   given   in   the   local  tongue according  to   the   principle  of   equality?  Or   would  it   be   necessary, even  in   the   interest  of   the   scholars,  to   keep   German  as   the   language of   education,  that  they   might  have  access  to  modern science?  A   like   embarrassment  hindered  the   application  of   the principle  of   equality  to   "   offices  and   public   life."  The   unity   of the   monarchy  required  a  state  language  for   common  operations. German  had   always   been  the   language  of   the   court,  the   government, and   the   army,   and,   besides,   the   only   language   in   which  the

*   It   would  be   out   of   place   here  to   consider  whether  European  races  are distinct  in   the   ethnological  sense,  that  is   to   say,  varieties  of   men  with  an anthropological  character,  fixed  and  transmissible,  or   differ  only   in   language and   education.

other  nations  themselves  could  communicate  with  each  other.* It   was  clearly   necessary  to   leave  it   this   privilege  and   to   restrict the   equality  to   local  administration  and  the   courts.  But  there again,  how  should  it   be   established  in   practice?  It   was  not enough  to   draw  up   regulations  and   advice  in   various  languages; every  subject   must  be   given   the   right   to   speak   to   the   authorities and  receive  their  answer,  to   present  actions,  and   to   receive  judgment in   his   own  tongue.  But  how  could  every  office-holder  be expected  to   have  a   fluent  knowledge  of   every   language  in   the province?  Mixed  primary  schools,  secondary  and  higher  education, and   the   regulation  of   languages  in   the   courts  and   administration, have   thus   been   the   principal   fields   of   conflict.

In   these  conflicts  the   position   of   parties   was   determined  by   the electoral  organization.  The  Constitution  of   1867   had   preserved the   system  of   1861,   which  rested  not  on  the   abstract  right   of suffrage,  regarded  as  revolutionary,  but   on  the   "   representation of   interests."  Four  classes  of   electors  had   been  established  according to   qualifications  based  on  economic  status:  great   landowners, chambers  of   commerce,  cities,   and   rural  districts;  each class  voted  separately  and   elected  its   own  deputies;  in   the   rural districts  the   vote  was   in   two   degrees.  Not   only   was  the   suffrage restricted,  for   there  was  a   property  qualification  (varying  in   different provinces),   even   for   city   and   rural   voters;   but   it   was  also very  unevenly  distributed,  for   in   the   classes  of   great   landowners and  chambers  of   commerce,  where  voters  were  few,   each  vote had  much  more  weight  than  in   the   city   class,   and   in   the   latter more  than  in   the   rural  districts.  As   the   majority  of   great   landowners, merchants,  and   manufacturers  were  either  German  or Germanized,  this  inequality  in   representation  secured  the   Germans a   majority  in   almost  all   the   diets,   even   in   the   Slavic  countries (Bohemia,  Moravia,  Silesia),  where  the   native  population was  represented  only   by   rural  districts.  The   German  majorities in   the   Diets  assured  a   German  majority  in   the   Reichsrath.

Political  and   National  Parties. - The   German  provinces  in   the

## *   The   following  table,   taken  from  the   official  census,  gives   the   proportion of   languages  in   1869   and   in   1890 ; the   figures   are  given   in   millions  :

|            |    |    | 1869   | 1890   |             |    | 1869   |   1890 |
|------------|----|----|--------|--------|-------------|----|--------|--------|
| German,    | .  | ,  | • 7-1  | 8.5    | Slovenian,  | .  | . 1.19 |   1.2  |
| Czech,     | .  | .  | .4-7   | 5-5    | Croatian, . | .  | .0.52  |   0.65 |
| Polish,    | .  | .  | . 2.44 | 3.8    | Italian, .  | .  | .0.58  |   0.67 |
| Ruthenian, | .  |    | .2.58  | 3.0    | Rouman, .   | .  | .0.20  |   0.2  |

central  regions  were  divided,  not   into*   nationalist  parties,   but   into Liberal  and   Catholic  parties,  like   those  of   other  countries.  The Liberals  predominated  in   the   industrial  provinces  of   the   east, Lower  Austria  (where  Vienna  is   situated),  Styria,   the   region   of the   metallurgic  industry,  and   Carinthia.  The  Catholic  strength lay   in   the   mountains  of   the   west,  where  the   peasants  were  still under  clerical  influence;  they   had   a   permanent  majority  in   the Tyrol,   and   won   it   in   Vorarlberg  and   Salzburg.  In   Upper   Austria the   majority   depended  on   the   great   landowners,  who   followed the   government.

The  Slovenian  province  of   Carniola  became  the   centre  of   the Slovenian  national  party,  which  secured  the   equality  of   Slovenians in   Carniola  and   claimed  it   for   the   provinces  where Slovenians  remained  subject  to  the  Germans  (Carinthia  and Styria),   or   to   the   Italians  (Istria,   Goerz,   and   Trieste).

In   the   southern  provinces  the   Italians  at   first   predominated; then  little   by   little   they   gave   place   to   the   Slavic  population  of   the country,  the   Slovenians  in   Istria,  Goerz,  Gradisca,  and   Trieste, and  the   Croats  in   Dalmatia.  The  defection  of   the   great   landowners lost   them   the   Diet   in   Dalmatia;  the   Croat   majority   made Croatian  the  language  of   ·   the   province.  In   the  Tyrol   the regional  division  of   races  still   obtained:  Germans  in   the   north, Italians  in   the   south;   the   Italian  minority  demanded  a   separate administration  for   the   Italian  districts.

In   the   northern  provinces,  where  the   Slavs  were  strongest,  parties divided  on  nationalist  lines.

Bohemia  was  the   centre  of   the   Czech  party.   The   Czechs  controlled the   country  parts   and   occupied  at   least  two-thirds  of   the kingdom;  but  the   great   landowners  assured  a  strong  majority to   the   German  party   in   the   Diet   until   the   government,  which  had now  allied  itself  to   the   Czechs,  gained   the   election  of   a  majority on   their   side   (1879).   In   the   old   provinces  now   joined   to Bohemia  (Moravia  and  Silesia),  where  the  great  mass  of   the people  were  Czech,  the   Germans  held  their  majority,  thanks  to the   cities   and   landowners.

In   Galicia  the   Polish  party  predominated,  directed  by   the Catholic  aristocracy,  to   which  the   mass  of   the   Polish  population was  still   subject.  The  Ruthenians  had  never  had  a  political power  proportionate  to   their  numbers;  they   had   remained  a   rural class,   socially   inferior,  and   even  in   the   Ruthenian  region   a   portion of   the   deputies  are  still   Poles.  The   Galician  Diet  has   always been  controlled  by   a  majority  of   Polish  nobles;  the   Ruthenian

minority  confined  itself  to   asking   for   autonomy  for   its   schools and  church  (United  Greeks).

Bukovina,  where  the   people  are   Roumanian,  has  led   only   a feeble  political  existence,  At   first  it   sent  ministerial  deputies to   the   Reichsrath;  then  the   Roumanian  national  party   finally gained  possession  of   a   majority  in   its   Diet.

Thus,  at   the   beginning  of   the   constitutional  system,  there  already existed   in   Austria  two   German  political   parties,   liberal  and conservative  (which  were  to  subdivide  into  groups),  and  seven nationalist  parties   (Czechs,  Poles,  Ruthenians,  Slovenians,  Italians, Croats,   and   Roumanians),  whose  policy   consisted  principally in   trying   to   gain   from  the   central  government  concessions for   their  languages  and  their  national  autonomy.  These  parties in   the   Reichsrath  were  organized  in   extra-parliamentary meetings  called  clubs.  Each  formed  only   a   slight   minority.  So there  has   never  been  in   the   Reichsrath  a   homogeneous  majority composed  of   a  single   party.  The  majority  has   always  been  a coalition  between  parties.

The  leading  question  in   domestic  policy   was  the   adjustment of   relations  with  the   clergy.  Should  the   official  power  of   the Church  be   maintained  as   it   was  established  by   the   Concordat  of 1855   (see   p.   422),   with   prohibition  of   non-Catholic  public   worship and  clerical  control  of   schools?  Or   should  the   German  lay   system be   adopted?  The   liberal  party,  composed,  like   the   national liberal  party   in   Germany,  of   the   imperialist  and  anti-clerical middle  class,   demanded,  first   of   all,   ecclesiastical  and   educational reform.  It   was  sub-divided  into  two  clubs,  progressive  and  liberal. The   Conservative  party   demanded  the   maintenance  of   the old   ecclesiastical  and   economic  system;  it   was  composed  of   two sets  of   opponents  to   the   liberals,  German  Catholics  and   conservatives from   the   little   countries  (Slovenians  and   Croats).

National  politics  were  occupied  at  once  with  the  language question  and  the   rights   of   local  Diets.  The   Germans  wished  to retain  German  as  the   state  language  for   the   courts,  administration, and   secondary  schools.  The   other  races,   in   proportion  to their  power,  demanded  either  simply  the   administration  of   their own  schools  and  churches,  administrative  autonomy,  complete equality  of   their  language,  or   independence  of   their  Diet.

In   foreign   affairs  the   German  liberals  favoured  Germany  and Italy,   while  the   Catholics  were  hostile  to   them.  Among  the Slavic  races,  the   Czechs,  in   their  role  of   Panslavists,  were  enthusiastically friendly   toward   Russia  and   hostile  toward  Ger-

## 534  THE   CONSTITUTIONAL  SYSTEM  IN  AUSTRIA.

many;  the   Poles  still   hated  Russia  irreconcilably;  the   Slovenians, Croats,  and   Ruthenians  had  Russian  sympathies.

In   this   intersection  of   political  contradictions,  which  seemed to   permit   only   temporary  combinations,  the   various  parties  in Austria  have,   however,  united  in   more  lasting   coalitions  than  in Germany.  A   social  affinity  attracted  the   aristocratic  Polish  and Czech  clubs  to   the   German  conservative  clubs:  a   common  hostility united   the   national  "   historic  rights   "   parties   and   the   oldregimists  against  the   new  centralized  and  liberal  constitution. There  was  a   natural  coalition  between  the   Slavs,   the   aristocrats, and  the   Catholics.

After  1867   the   Emperor  governed  as  a  constitutional  sovereign, and   even  seemed  to   adopt   the   practices   of   the   parliamentary system,  for   the   ministry  always   had   a   majority  in   the   Chamber of   Deputies.  But,   in   contradiction  to   the   parliamentary  system, the   Emperor  did   not  choose  his   ministers  from  the   majority  in the   Chamber;  following  out   his   personal  policy,   he   chose  ministers who   made   a   majority   for   themselves  in   the   Chamber.  The electoral  system  of   classes  created  among  the   deputies  a  social division  which  prevented  the   formation  of   an   independent  government majority.   In   practice   the   deputies   from  the   propertyholding  classes  always   followed  the   ministry,  and   their  votes  sufficed to   give   the   majority  to   one  or  other  of   the   coalitions.  (In the   House  of   Lords  the   ministers  could  directly  control  the   balance of   parties   by   appointing  new   life   members.)  Thus  the   majority depended  on   'the   landowners,  the   landowners  on  the ministry,  and   the   ministry  on   the   Emperor.  The   Emperor  could, therefore,  choose  with  which  party   he   would  carry  on  the   government. But   between  the   two  coalitions  he   has   never  been able   to   make  a   definite  choice.  As   a   German,  and   in   the   interests of   his   empire,   he   leans  toward  the   German  Centralist  coalition; as  an  aristocrat  and  Catholic,  he   personally  prefers  the   aristocratic federalist  coalition.  His   oscillations  between  the   two   have been  the   controlling  factor  in   the   political  history   of   Austria.

The   Liberal  Ministry  (1867-70).- The  Emperor  began   by   giving the   ministry   and   the   majority  to   the   German  liberal  party, which  accepted  the   new   Constitution  of   1867   without  reservation. The  Auersperg  ministry  was  principally  occupied  with  the   ecclesiastical struggle.   The   official  authority  of   the   Catholic clergy,  which  the   Concordat  of   1855   na&lt;3  formally  recognised, found  itself  in   irrevocable  contradiction  with  the   Constitution  of 1867,   which  guaranteed  complete  religious  liberty.  The  minis-

try,   without  repudiating  the  Concordat,  passed  laws  which practically  abrogated  it.   I.   Jurisdiction  of   marriage  affairs  was restored  to   the   lay   courts  and   a   civil   form   of   marriage   was  created for   cases  where  the   Church  refused  to   perform  the   ceremony. 2.   The   law   on   the   relations  between  school  and   Church  established the   principle  that:  "   The   superior  direction  and   supervision of   education  belong   to   the   state  and   are  exercised  by   the   organs which  it   creates  for   the   purpose."  In   consequence,  all   public schools  were  opened  "to  all   citizens  without  regard   to   creed," and  educational  offices  were  declared  "   equally  accessible  to   all citizens";  churches  and  religious  societies  of   all   creeds  received the   right   to   maintain  private   schools.  3.   The   law   on   "   interconfessional  relations  "   established  religious  equality  and   recognised the   right   of   every  subject   to   choose  his   religion   and   that   of   his children,  to   be   buried  in   the   public   cemetery,  and   to   enjoy   unrestrained freedom   in   religious   exercises.

These  laws,   which  were  carried  with  difficulty  through  the House  of   Lords  (1868),   put   an   immediate  stop   to   the   compulsive authority  of   the   clergy;   they   established  freedom  of   religion   and made  education  independent  of   the   Church.  This  was  the   chief ground  of   opposition.  The  concordat  had   been  a   treaty   between the   Emperor  and  the   Pope:   the   Catholic  party   declared  that  it could  be   abrogated  only   by   a  new  treaty  with  the   Pope.   The government,  on  the   contrary,  claimed,  in   the   name  of   the   sovereignty of   the   state,  the   sovereign  power  of   regulating  internal affairs.  A   theoretical  conflict  ensued  between  the   two  authorities, state   and   Church.  The   Pope,   in   an  address  (June,   1868), called  the  Constitution  of   1867   "   really   deplorable  "   (infanda sane)   and   the   laws  of   1868  "   abominable."  "   By   virtue  of   the apostolic  authority,"  he   "   rejected  and   condemned  these  laws," declaring  them  "   void  for   the   present  and   the   future."  In   consequence of   this   a   number  of   bishops   refused  to   issue  papers   in matrimonial  causes;  the   Archbishop  of   Linz,   who  resisted  with force,   was  tried   and   condemned,  in   1869,   but   afterward  pardoned.

The  ministry  had   to   reorganize  the   army  and   the   financial  system. It   adopted  the  Prussian  system  of   a  universal  military service  of   three   years,   but   with   a   garde   mobile,   on   the   French  plan. The  contingent  was  divided  into  two  parts,  one  doing   effective service  (tfiree   years   in   the   active  army,  seven  in   the   reserve,  two in   the   Landzvehr),  the   other  remaining  twelve  years   in   the Landivchr.  By   making  it   a   Cabinet  question,  the   ministry  secured the   exemption  of   the   number  of   the   effective  forces  from

annual  discussion,  as   in   Germany;  the   figure   was   fixed  for   ten years.  In   financial  affairs,  the   ministry  renounced  the   system  of chronic  deficit  and   loans:  it   re-established  the   balance  by   taxes and  a   partial   bankruptcy  under  form  of   a   tax  on   the   interest  of government  bonds.  The  ministry  was  always  supported  in   the Chamber  of   the   Reichsrath  by   a   majority  composed  of   German liberals  and   great   landowners.  But  the   Slavic  national  parties offered  a   vigorous  resistance  which  finally   defeated  the   ministry.

The  Czech  party  refused  to   sit   in   the   Bohemian  Diet.  In   the declaration  of   August,  1868,   the   Czech  nation  set   forth  its   theory and  claims:  between  the   Emperor,  its   hereditary  King,   and   the "   political   nation  of   Bohemia  "   exists  a   contract  renewed  at   each succession  by   the   King's   coronation  oath  and   the   representatives' oath  of   homage.  The  Kingdom  of   Bohemia  is   joined   to   Austria only   by   a   dynastic   union  (which   would  expire   with  the   dynasty) ; it   preserves  its   "   historic  and   rightful   individuality."  This  constitutional relation   cannot   be   changed   legally   except   "   by   a   new contract  between  the   King   of   Bohemia  and   the   lawful  representatives of   the   people."  No   outside  representative  body,   not  even the   Reichsrath,  has   the   right   to   impose   a   debt   or   taxes  on   Bohemia. The   Hungarian  compromise  has   robbed  the   Constitution of   1  860-6 1   of   all   value.  Bohemia  could  no   longer   recognise the   Reichsrath,  which  now  represented  only   "   a  chance  group without  historical  foundation."  The  constitutional  contest  cannot be   settled   except   by   an  agreement  between  the   King   and   the people.

The  Czechs  took  toward  the   Emperor  exactly  the   same  attitude that   the   Hungarians  had   taken  previous  to   1867.   They, too,   claimed  the   position  of   an   independent  nation  in   the   name  of "   historic  right  "   and   "   personal  union."  They   too   demanded the   reconstitution  of   the   Middle- Age   kingdom  by   the   reunion  of the   three   "   countries  under  the   crown  of   Wenceslaus  "   (Bohemia, Moravia,  Silesia).  It   was  the   same  historic  theory,  the   same tactics:  to   recognise  the   Emperor  by   the   title   of   King   only,   and to   refuse  to   enter  into   relations  with   the   other  countries  of   the Empire.  But  the   actual  situation  was  not  the   same.  The  Magyars had   always   been   self-governing;  the   absolutist  system  attempted after   1849   nad   been   too   short-lived  to   disorganize  them; they   had   found  themselves  still   intact,   with   their   aristocracy  still national,  and  had  unanimously  decided  to  repulse  any   form of   foreign   government.  The  Czechs  had  had  their  reaction  in 1620,   and   their   centralization  had   already   endured  two  and   a   half

centuries;  half   of   the   aristocracy  and   a   third  of   the   population were  foreigners,  accustomed  to  treat  Czechs  as   inferiors  and ready  to   defend  the   government  of   Vienna.  In   Moravia  and Silesia  the   foreign  element  controlled  the   country.  The  Germans answered  the   Czech  declaration  with  the   theory   that   Bohemia had   no  special   historic  right   and   consequently  no  other law   than   the   constitution  granted   by   the   Emperor.

The  Polish  party  set   forth  its   theory   in   the   resolution  passed   by the   Polish  majority  in   the   Galician  Diet.  Not   being   able,   like   the Magyars  and  Czechs,  to   invoke  the   right   of   forming  an   independent state,   it   confined  itself  to   demanding  "   national  autonomy." It   reproached  the   Constitution  of   1867   with  "   not  granting  the amount  of   legislative  and   administrative  independence  "   to   which the  country  was  entitled.  It   therefore  demanded  that  "   the Galician  delegation  should  not  take  part   in   the   deliberations  of the   Reichsrath  except   in   the   case  of   matters  common  to   this   kingdom and   the   other   countries."  It   wished  to   reserve  for   the   Diet legislation  on  matters  of   commerce,  credit,  education,  public health,  penal   law,   judicial   and   administrative  organization.

Attempt  at   a   Federalist  Constitution  (1870-71). - The  opposition, adopting   the   policy   of   abstinence  which  had   brought   success to   the   Magyars,  refused  to   sit   in   the   Reichsrath.  The   constitution gave   the   government  an  easy   means  of   action  against   a Diet  which  should  refuse  en  masse  to  choose  delegates  to   the Reichsrath;  this   was  the   right   to   have   delegates  directly   elected  by the   voters  who   chose  the   members  of   the   Diet.  But   against   the delegates  of   a   Diet   who   individually  refused  to   take   their  seats  in the   Reichsrath  the   government  was  powerless.  Meanwhile,  in Vienna,  the   workingmen,  organized  by   German  socialists,  came before  the   Chamber  with  a  great   demonstration  and  presented a   petition   for   universal  suffrage,   freedom  of   public   meeting,  association, and   the   press   (December,  1869).*

The  Emperor  began  by   dismissing  the   aristocratic  minority  of the   ministry  (December,  1869).  But  all   the   opposition  parties withdrew  from  the   Reichsrath,  the   Tyrolean  Catholics,  the   Galicians,   Slovenians,  Italians  from  Trieste  and   Istria,   and   the   Roumans  from  Bukovina;  there  remained  hardly  any   but  Germans, who  just   made  up  a  quorum.  The  centralist  ministers  demanded the   dissolution  of   the   local   Diets.  The   Emperor  refused.

*   The   military  law   brought  on  an   insurrection  of   Slav  mountaineers  in southern  Dalmatia;  the  government  subdued  it   only   by   renouncing  the introduction  of   the   Landwehr  into  this  region   (1869-70).

He  changed  his   system  and   determined  to   make  terms  with   the Slavic  nationalist  aristocracy,  as   he   had   done  in   1865   with   the Magyar  aristocracy.  Meanwhile  he   took  a   transitional  ministry (April,   1870)   under  a   Pole,   Potocki.

The  uncertainty  caused  by   the  Franco-Prussian  war  put   a temporary  check  upon  the   Emperor's  plans.  But   the   war  over, he   called  a   federalist  ministry  with   an  aristocratic  chief  (Hohenwart)   and  two  Czech  members  (February,  1871).  The  parties were  of   two  groups:  constitutionalist  (Verfassungstreu),  which wanted  to   preserve  the   centralist  constitution  of   1861 ;   -federalist, which  demanded  an   increase  of   power   for   the   local  Diets.  The federalist  ministry  had  the   Diets  dissolved  that  had   a   German constitutionalist  majority;  and   the   landowners,  who  always   supported the   ministry,   turned  the   balance  in   favour  of   the federalists.

The  Czechs  joined   the   coalition  only   on   the   condition  of   independence for   Bohemia.  Their  chiefs  negotiated  personally  with the   Emperor,  who  announced  the   outcome  in   a  message  (September 12,   1871).   He   declared  himself  "   willing   to   recognise  the rights   of   this   kingdom,"  and   ready   to   renew  the   coronation  oath. The  Bohemian  Diet  replied  with  28   fundamental  articles  establishing for   Bohemia  the   same  system  of   union  as   that  of   Hungary.

A   violent  agitation  arose  all   through  the   German  states:  the Diets  protested,  the   newspapers  threatened,  the   people   held   massmeetings.  The  Emperor,  however,  was  most  influenced  by   the   fact that  Chancellor  Beust  and  the  Hungarian  ministers,  disturbed by   the   Czech  Panslavism,  joined   hands  against  the   federalists. A   council  which  was   held   between  the   leading  ministers  (October, 1871)   determined  the   Emperor  to   return  to   the   Constitution of   1867.   The  Hdhenwart  ministry  withdrew.  Then  Beust,  its principal  opponent,  suddenly  fell   into   disgrace  and   was  replaced in   the   foreign   affairs  of   Austria-Hungary  by   a   Hungarian,  Andrassy.  (The   title   of   Chancellor  was  suppressed.)

Electoral  Reform  and  Constitutionalist  Ministries  (1871-78). In   returning  to   the   constitution,  the   Emperor  took  a   German ministry  again   (Auersperg);  a  new  dissolution  of   the   Diets  restored the   majority  to   the   German  constitutionalist  party   in   the Reichsrath.  In   turn  the   Czechs,  Slavs,   and  Catholics  refused  to sit   in   it.   But   the   ministry   had   won  over  the   Poles  and   the   Dalmatian Croats.  It   now  renewed  the   project   of   election  by   direct vote.

Although  electoral  reform  had  been  accepted  in   principle,  it was  not  accomplished  for   more  than  a  year.   All   were  agreed that   the   number  of   deputies  should  be   increased;  but   the   liberals proposed  to   distribute  the   additional  seats  among  the   least   represented classes;   the   ministry   was  unwilling  to   sacrifice  the   privileges of   the   propertied  classes,  whose  support  it   would  need  in making  up   the   two-thirds  necessary  to   a   change   of   constitution.

The  electoral  law   of   1873   passed   the   Chamber  of   Deputies  by a   vote  of   120  against   2.   For  election  of   the   deputies  by   the local  Diets  it   substituted  election  by   the   voters.  But   it   applied to   these  elections  the   system  of   classes  used  in   the   election  of members  of   the   local  Diets.*

The  number  of   deputies  was  increased  to   353:   85   to   landowners, 137   to   cities  and   chambers  of   commerce,  131   to   rural districts  (these   by   indirect  election).  There  was  still   an  enormous inequality  of   representation  (in   1890,   i   deputy   to   63   electors  in the   property  holders'  curia,   I   to   27   in   the   chambers  of   commerce, i   to   2918   in   the   cities,   i   to   11,600   in   the   rural   districts).  The Germans  still   held  the   majority.  (Up   to   1878   there  were  in   the Chamber  of   Deputies  about  220   Germans,  against  115   Slavs  and 15   Italians.)

23

## *   The   following  table  gives   the   distribution  of   seats  among  the   classes and  provinces: Chambers 27

Trieste:  4   (elected  by   3   electoral  bodies  and   i   chamber  of   commerce).

|                |                |    |    | Rural Districts.    | C 'ities.   | Chambers Chambers or Commerce.   | Great Landowners.   |
|----------------|----------------|----|----|---------------------|-------------|----------------------------------|---------------------|
| Bohemia,       | .              |    |    |                     | 32          | 7                                |                     |
|                |                |    |    | II                  | 13          | 3                                | 9                   |
|                |                |    |    | IO                  | 13          | 3                                | 20                  |
| Lower Austria, | Lower Austria, |    |    |                     | 17          | 2                                | 8                   |
| Upper Austria, | Upper Austria, |    |    | 7                   | 6           | i                                | 3                   |
| Styria,        |                |    |    | 30 9                | 8           | 2                                | 4                   |
| Carinthia,     |                |    |    | 4                   | 3           | i                                | i                   |
| Bukovina,      |                |    |    | 3                   | 2           | I                                | 3                   |
|                |                |    |    | Rural ictricts. 6 D | of          | Cities and Chambers Commerce.    | Great Landowners.   |
| Dalmatia,      | Dalmatia,      |    |    |                     |             | 2                                | I                   |
|                |                |    |    | 2                   |             |                                  | I                   |
| Goerz,         |                | .  |    | 2                   |             |                                  | i                   |
| Carniola       |                |    |    | 5                   |             | 3                                | 2                   |
| Salzburg,      | Salzburg,      |    |    | 2                   |             | 2                                | I                   |
| Tyrol,         |                | .  | .  | 8                   |             | 5                                | 5                   |
| Vorarlberg,    | Vorarlberg,    |    |    | 2                   |             | i                                | o                   |
| Silesia,       | Silesia,       |    |    | 3                   |             | 4                                | 3                   |

The  ministry,  supported  by   the   German  Constitutionalist  majority, resumed  its   anti-clerical  policy.   The   "May   Laws"  (1874), so  called  in   imitation  of   the   German  laws  of   the   Culturkampf, formally  abolished  the   system  of   the   concordat.  They   obliged the   bishops  to   report  to   civil   authority  all   vacancies  in   Church offices  and  all   nominations,  and  recognised  the   right   of   nonCatholics  to   found  religious  societies.  The  Pope   protested;  he wrote  to   the   Emperor,  who  replied  by   entrenching  himself  behind the   rights   of   the   Reichsrath.

There  was  under  this  ministry  a   fever  of   stock-jobbing  like that   of   the   "   promoters  "   in   Berlin  (p.   496).   The   fictitious  values created  by   the   banking  societies,  railroad  and   building  corporations suddenly   fell   in   the   famous  Vienna  crash  (May   9,   1873),   a gigantic  collapse  of   the   stock-exchange,  which  was   followed  by   a long   business  depression.

In   the   Reichsrath  the   Constitutionalist  party   had   organized  into distinct  clubs,   which  were,   however,  united  to   support  the   ministry: the   United  Left,   nicknamed  "   the   Young   Ones  "   (about   65 deputies),  divided  into  democrats  and  German  nationalists, - the Liberal  Club  (about   100),   nicknamed  "   the   Old   Ones," - the   Centralist Right   (about   60),   a   group  of   great   landowners  who   made up   the   Coronini  club,   mainly   Italians.  The   opposition  consisted of   the   Polish  club  (between  40   and  45),  - the   Catholics,  who were  not  yet   organized, - the   Hohenwart  club  (Rechtspariei),  composed of   federalists  belonging  to  the  small  countries.  The Czechs  (more   than  40)   refused  to   attend  the   Reichsrath  after  the rupture  of   1871.

Parties  and   Politics  in   Hungary  (1867-78). - A   period   of   political calm   followed  the   compromise  of   1867   in   the   Kingdom  of Hungary.  As   in   Austria,  the   compromise  had   given   the   government to   the   politically   dominant  race,   though   not  the   greatest numerically.  Of   a  population  of   16,000,000  souls,   the   Magyars numbered  at   that  time  hardly   more  than  6,000,000.  But  their relative  force  was  much  greater  than  that  of   the   Austrian  Germans. They   constituted  a   compact  nation  with  a   patriotic  aristocracy accustomed  to   ruling,   very   much  in   favour  with   the   Emperor, and   an   inert   and   docile  rural  population.  The   commercial bourgeoisie,  composed  mainly  of   Germans  and  Jews,   had  no political  force   whatever.  The   other  races  were  mainly   composed of   masses  of   peasants  having   no  political  interest,  and,   besides, cut  off   in   the   extremities  of   the   kingdom, - the   Slovacs  in   the northwest,  the   Roumans  in   the   east  (in   Transylvania),  and   the

Serbs  in   the   southeast.  The  German  colonies  scattered  over the   Hungarian  plains,  the   Germans  and  Jews   established  individually in   the  cities,  were  absolutely  without  cohesion  or national  organization,  and  did   not   form  a  party.  Two  groups alone  had   a   national  organization:  the   kingdom  of   Croatia-Slavonia  in   the   southeast,  and   the   little   group  of   Saxons  in   Transylvania (200,000   souls),   a   German  colony   which  retained  its German  character,  but   whose  growth  in   population  was  slight.

The  government  had  at   first  but   little  to   do   with  the   Slovac peasants,  who  either  did   not  vote  at   all   or  else   voted  for   the   Magyar nobles.  The  Serbs  had  their  orthodox  patriarch,  their churches  and   their  schools,  and   especially  clung   to   their  religious autonomy.  Transylvania,  where  the  government  had  opposed the   Saxons  to   the   Magyars  by   organizing  an   independent  Diet (1849   and  1863),   was   incorporated  into  the   Kingdom  of   Hungary. It   lost   its   Diet   and   its   independent  administration,  and was  divided  into  75   districts  directly  represented  in   the   Hungarian Diet.   The   Saxons  joined   the   Magyars  through  fear   of the   orthodox  Rouman  peasants, who  formed  the   base  of   the   population :   the   electoral  system  of   property  qualification  gave  almost all   the   rural   seats  to   the   two   aristocracies.

The  Croats  alone,   who   had   in   old   times  a   constitution  and   were represented  by   an  aristocracy,  had  been  able  to   preserve  their autonomy  by   taking  advantage  of   the   rivalry  between  Austria and  Hungary.  The  compromise  concluded  between  the  Hungarian and   Croatian  Diets  (1868)   left   to   the   united  kingdom  of Croatia-Slavonia  its   governor  (Ban),  its   capital  Agram,  and its   Diet   composed  of   75   members  elected  by   property  holders  and 48   members  by   right   (magnates  and   dignitaries).  It   was  a   selfgoverned  state,  with  a   national  coat  of   arms,  an  official  national language  (Croatian),  a   system  of   justice,   education,  religion,  and a   legislative  power  exercised  by   the  Diet.  But  it   remained united  to   Hungary  by   very  extensive  "   common  affairs,"  which included,  in   addition  to   the   affairs  common  to   the   two  states  of Hungary  and  Austria,  all   questions  of   commerce  and   of   communication. In   these  matters,  Croatia  was  represented  in   the government  by   a   Croatian  minister,  in   the   Hungarian  Diet   by   40 delegates  from  the   Diet  at   Agram,   in   the   Imperial  Delegation  by 5   delegates.  A   financial  agreement,  made  for   ten  years,   divided the  income  from  Croatian  taxes  between  the  two  countries, granting  45   per   cent,   for   Croatia's  particular  expenses,  but   fixing a   minimum  which  Hungary  must  complete  in   case  of   a   deficit.

## 542  THE   CONSTITUTIONAL   SYSTEM  IN  AUSTRIA.

The  Hungarian  government  at   Pesth  appointed  the   Ban;   it   also imposed  in   1868  an  electoral  system  so  arranged  as   to   give   the majority  to   the   advocates  of   the   compromise.

In   the   two   Hungarian  Chambers  the   secondary  peoples  had thus  only   insignificant  minorities.  The  Diet  was  composed almost  entirely  of   Magyars,  and  party   division  was  based  only on  questions  of   policy.  The  situation  was  almost  the   same  as   in 1848.  The  Right   or  moderate  opposition,  the   conservative  party, especially  numerous  in   the   Chamber  of   Magnates,  was  still  in favour  at   the   court  of   Vienna;  its   aim   was  to   maintain  the   aristocratic and   Catholic  regime   as   firmly   as   possible.  The   "   address party,"  organized  as  the   "   Deak  Club,"  had   accepted  the   compromise of   1867   and  the   agreement  with  Austria;  it   wished  to establish  in   Hungary  a   liberal  parliamentary  system,  at   the   same time  preserving  the   administration  by   the   nobility.  The  Left, formerly  the   upholders  of   the   Constitution  of   '48,   were  hostile  to Austria,  demanded  a  personal  union,  and  protested  against  the compromise  of   1867   as  contrary  to   national  independence.  The extreme  Left  was  composed  of   democrats,  followers  of   Kossuth, and  exiles  of   1848,   irreconcilable  enemies  to   Austria.  (Kossuth, who  had   retired  to   Italy,   refused  to   the   day   of   his   death,   in   1894, to   return  to   his   native  land   or   to   recognise  Francis  Joseph.)

The  government  was  always  strictly  parliamentary,  the   King choosing  only   those  ministers  who  had  the   support  of   the   majority in   the   House.  But  in   Hungary,  as   in   Italy,   the   ministry had   until   now  always   controlled  the   elections.

The  Deak  party   had   at   first   a   strong   majority  and   became  the liberal  ministerial  party.  The  liberal  ministry  concluded  the arrangements  with  Austria  and  had  the   laws  of   1848   revised.  It then  began   the   reorganization  of   the   army,  the   administration, and   the   financial  system.  The   active  army  remained  common  to all   the   states  of   the   Empire,   and   retained  German  as   the   language of   command.  But  the   Honveds,  corresponding  to   the   Landwehr, became  an  exclusively  Hungarian  army.  The  counties  remained self-governing,  directed  by   a  committee  formed  half  of   elected delegates,  half   of   the   heaviest  taxpayers;  none  dared  to   make  a complete  reform,  for   fear   of   irritating  the   nobility.  The  liberal party   had   also   in   its   program  the   separation  of   the   state  from Church  authority  (full   religious  liberty,   civil   marriage,  abolition of   compulsory  confession  of   faith).  The  discussion  of   these  reforms was,   however,  long   delayed,   for   fear   of   driving   the   Catholic party   into   a   coalition  with   the   Left.

The  principal  matter  was  to   secure  national  unity   in   the   country by   Magyarizing  it.  The  government,  with  the   aid   of   all   parties, struggled   to   give   Magyar   the   place   occupied  by   German  in Cisleithania - the   language  of   the   state  and  of   civilization;  it made  it   the   language  not  only   of   the   government  and  the   University, but   of   the   administration,  courts,  fiscal  offices,  and   secondary public   education.  It   was  next  introduced  into  the municipal  council  of   Buda-Pesth  (1872)   *   and  in   the   railroads, where  it   had   to   be   taught   to   employees.  The   scattered  Germans became  quickly  Magyarized,  and  soon  they   even  adopted  Magyar names. f

The  financial  reorganization  was  so   laborious  that   it   produced a   crisis   in   the   parties.  The   deficit  increased,  credit  diminished, and  the   ministerial  party  was  weakened  little  by   little.  At   the elections  of   1869   it   had   lost   50   votes  ;   after   1872   it   sought   to   win over  the   Right.  The  main  branch  of   the  Left  (Left   Centre), under  Tisza's  direction,  renounced  the   policy   of   a   personal  union and  joined   the   Deak  party   (1875)   in   trying   to   restore  financial order.  The  liberals,  thus  re-enforced,  had  329   seats  against  88 opponents.  They  have  always  held  their  majority  and  governed Hungary   without  interruption.  After  the   election  of   August, 1875,   Tisza   took   the   ministry   and   held   it   for   over   fifteen years.

In   Croatia  the   unionist  party,   which  had   made  the   compromise of   1868,   was  accused  of   having   sold   itself   to   the   Magyars,  and   of monopolizing  all   the   official  positions.  The   nationalist  party   won the   majority  in   the   Diet   at   Agram   in   1872,   and   compelled  the Hungarian  government  to  appoint  the   President  of   the   Diet  as Ban.

Crisis  of   the   Occupation  of   Bosnia  (1878). - The  compromise arranged  between  Austria  and  Hungary  for   ten  years  was  renewed after   two   and   a   half   years  of   laborious  negotiations  between the   two  governments.  The  two  ministries  secured  its adoption  only   by   agreeing  to   make  it   a   question  of   confidence  in the   two  parliaments. twveen

*The  new  commune  of   Buda-Pesth,  established  as   the   capital  of   Hungary, was   formed  by   the   union  of   Pesth  with  the   old   German  city   of   Ofen (Buda),  on   the   other  side   of   the   Danube,  and   a   number  of   suburbs.

f It   is   said   that   Mommsen,  on   his   arrival  at   Pesth,   declared  that   he   had seen  on   his   journey  three  persons  of   true  Magyar  type:   Erdy,   Matrai, Toldy;  he   was  told  that  the   real  names  of   his   three  Magyars  were  Lutzenbacher,  Rothcrebs,  and  Schaedel.- The  famous  artist  Munkacsy  was  of German  parentage.

The  crisis  in   foreign   affairs  completed  the   rupture   between  the Emperor  and  the   constitutionalist  party.  By   the   decisions  of   the Congress  of   Berlin,  Austria  undertook  the  administration  of Bosnia  and  Herzegovina  in   the  name  of   the   Sultan,  with  the object   of   restoring  them  to   order.  The   Austrian  army   took  possession of   the   territory  without  a   battle.  But   immediately  the Mussulmans  in   the   mountains  revolted  ;   a   war  was   inevitable  and an  army  of   200,000  men  was  needed  to   carry   it   on.  The   expedition was   a   costly   one,   and   even  after   peace  was  made  the   country proved  too  poor  to  share  the  expense.  Occupation  involved further  increase  in   expenditure.  In   addition,  it   complicated  the inter-racial  strife.  The  provinces  which  were  occupied  had  a population  speaking  the   Croatian  language,  but   divided  among three  religions:  Mussulman,  Orthodox,  and  Catholic.  The Croatian  nationalist  party  adopted  the   idea  of   a   Greater  Croatia which  should  unite  all   races  speaking  the  Croatian  tongue (Croatia,  Dalmatia,  Slavonia,  and  Bosnia).  This  Slavic  agitation was  equally   disquieting  to   both   Hungary  and   Austria.

In   both   states  the   parliaments  were  displeased  with  the   ministries for   undertaking  the   occupation  of   Bosnia,  and   the   additional expenditure  it   involved,  without  consulting  them;  they   asserted that   the   treaty   of   Berlin  ought   to   be   laid   before  them  for   discussion. In   both  states  the   ministers,  instead  of   resigning,  asked  the confidence  of   the   House.  In   Hungary  the   address  favourable  to the   government,  in   spite   of   the   enormous  ministerial  majority, was  carried  by   a   majority  of   only   22.   In   Austria  it   was  passed only   through  the   support  of   the   Poles  and   the   Right,   usually   in opposition  (1878).

The  Delegations  reduced  the  extra  appropriations  demanded for   the   Bosnia  expedition  (1878).  The  wrangling  continued  on the   occupation  question.  The  left  wished  to  evacuate  Bosnia, the   government  wished  to   organize  a  system  of   definite  occupation- until   the   country  occupied  should  be   able  to   reimburse Austria  for   the   expenses  of   occupation.  Several  attempts  were* still   made  to   patch   up   the   Constitutionalist  ministry;  then  a   provisional ministry   was  once  more  resorted  to   (February,  1879).

The  Emperor,  who  placed   his   foreign  policy   before  everything else,   now  made  a   new   departure.  He   deserted  the   Constitutionalist party   and   returned  to   the   aristocratic-federalist  coalition. This  necessitated  a  negotiation  with  the  Czechs.  This  time these  did   not  ask   for   the   independence  of   the   Kingdom  of   Bohemia. They   consented  to   take   seats  in   the   Reichsrath,  only

asserting  that  they   "   reserved  the   question  of   the   constitution and  crown  of   Bohemia  "   (1879).

At   the   elections  of   1879   the   great   landowners  once  more  upset the   balance  of   parties.  But   the   majority  of   the   federalist  coalition was  still   very   weak.  The   145   constitutionalists  were  in   two clubs,  94   liberals,  51   progressists;  the   168   federalists  in   three clubs,   54   Czechs,  57   Poles,   and   57   in   the   Hohenwart  club   (German federalists,  Slovenians,  Dalmatian  Croats).  There  were,   besides 40   unclassified  deputies,  mainly   great   landowners.  The minister  of   the   interior,  Taaffe,   announced  his   intention  of   grouping them   in   a   third   party   which  should  hold   the   balance  between the   two  opposing  parties.  The  Emperor  charged  him  with  the formation  of   a   ministry.

Federalist  Policy   of   the   Taaffe  Ministry  (1879-93). - The   Taaffe ministry,  which  was  to   last   fourteen  years,  presented  itself  at   first as  a   ministry  of   conciliation,  formed  of   members  of   both  parties. In   reality,   from   its   beginning  it   favoured  the   ristocratic  federalist-Catholic coalition,   and   after   1880   its   members  were  all federalists.

The  German  left  opposed  the  ministry  on   its   military  law. They   were  no   longer   willing   to   vote  it   except   for   three  years, and  with  a   reduction  of   effective  force;   the   ministry  insisted  that it   should  be   passed   for   10   years  and   with   the   same  effective  force. As   this   would  require  a   two-thirds  majority,  the   law,   after  having been   twice   defeated,  was  passed   through  the   defection  of   a half   of   the   liberal  club   (December,  1879).   The  federalist  coalition, now   become  the   ministerial  party,   accepted  the   constitution of   1867,   using   their  support  of   the   government  to   gain   concessions in   favour  of   the   Slavic  peoples  and  the   Catholic  clergy. By   slow  but   constant  effort  the   nationalist  aristocracies  and   the clergy   increased  their  influence  at   the   expense  of   the   German officials  and   the   lay   power.

The  two   Czech  parties,  Old   and   Young   Czechs,  united  against the   Germans.  They   secuured  the   division  of   the   University  of Prague  into  two  universities,  one  German,  the  other  Czech (1882),  and  later  an  ordinance  from  the  minister  of   justice, Prazak  (1886),  obliging  office-holders  to   answer  the   public   in Whichever  of   the   two   languages,  Czech  or   German,  the   demand was  presented.  This  was  a  means  of   shutting  out   German  officers who   were  not   familiar  with   Czech.  Bohemia  continued  to be   the   most  agitated   province  in   the   whole  Empire,   torn   by   Czech demonstrations,  scuffles  between  Czech  and  German  students  at

## 54^           THE   CONSTITUTIONAL  SYSTEM  IN  AUSTRIA.

Prague,  struggles  in   the   Diet,   where  the   Czechs  had   finally   (1883) gained  the   majority,  and   quarrels  over  the   schools.  The  Germans, feeling   themselves  overpowered,  asked  first   that   Bohemia should  be   separated  into  two  racial  groups,  each  with  its   own language;  then,   adopting  the   tactics  formerly  pursued  by   the Czechs,  they   refused  to   sit   in   the   Diet. mans,

The  Polish  aristocratic  party   had  already  gained  the   upper hand  in   Galicia,  where  since  1877   it   had   reduced  the   Ruthenians to   an   insignificant  minority  in   the   Diet   (10   in   150).   The   government abandoned  Galicia  to   its   management,  confining  itself  to preventing  official  demonstrations  against  Russia,  which  would have  interfered  with  its   foreign   policy.

The  Slovenian  party,   having   regained  its   majority  in   the   Diet of   Carniola  (which  it   had   lost   from  1877   to   1883),   completed  the Slavicizing  of   that   province.

The  conservatives  secured  the   abolition  of   industrial  liberty. The  law   of   1883   restored  compulsory  corporations  for   a   part   of the   industrial  and   commercial  professions;  no  one  could  be   admitted to   them  except  after  examination,  with  a  certificate  of capacity.  They   carried  an  electoral  reform  lowering  the   property qualification  in   the   inferior  electoral  classes,  granting suffrage  to   "   5-florin   men,"   w'ho   as  a   rule   favoured  the   Catholic party   (1882).

In   the   face   of   this   coalition,  rendered  irresistible  by   its   alliance with  the   Emperor,  the   German  liberals  were  uncertain  as   to   the policy  they   should  pursue.  At   first  they   were  divided.  The progressist  club,   displeased  at   'having   been  deserted  in   the   fight against  the   military  law,   broke  away   from  the   liberal  coalition (1879).  They   then  came  together  in   a   "   United  Left  "   (1881), which  took  a   German  national  character  with  the   motto  "   unity of   all   Germans  in   Austria."  Next  this  left   broke  in   two,  the German  Club   and   the   Austro-German  Club  (1885).  Finally  a   part of   the   German  club   detached  itself  from  the   rest,   as   the   "   union of   German  Nationalists  "   who  refused  to   desert  the   anti-Semites. At   each   election  to   the   Reichsrath  the   Left   suffered  a   loss.  It   lost its   majority  in   the   Delegation  (1882).  In   1885   it   had   fallen  to 132   members;  in   1891   to   no.  The  House  of   Lords,  where  the German  party  predominated,  delayed  the   vote  on  the   school  law; but   the   ministry,  by   appointing  new  peers,   finally   gained  a majority.

Outside  of   the   Reichsrath  the   Socialist  party  was   for   a   long time   paralyzed  by   the   depression  following  the   financial  crash,

## FEDERALIST  POLICY  OF   THE    TAAFFE  MINISTRY.      547

then  by   the   struggle  between  the   socialists  and   anarchists.  The anarchists,  who  were  mainly  Slavs,  attempted  the   policy   of   terrorism by   means  of   riots  (1882-83).  The  government  met  them with  martial  law   and   special   measures  (1884-85).

The  federalist  coalition  of   the   Taaffe  ministry  was  dislocated by   the   democratic  evolution  of   the   Czech  people.  The  democratic party   of   Young   Czechs,   formed  in   1867,   had   always   supported a   political  platform  opposed  to   that  of   the   Old   Czechs: universal  suffrage,  liberty   of   the   press  and   of   public   meetings, and   lay   schools.  But   it   had   consented  to   work  against   the   Germans in   harmony  with  the   aristocratic  party   of   Old   Czechs.  In 1887   it   broke  up   violently  on   the   national  question.  Gregr,   the leader  of   the   Young   Czechs,  reproached  Rieger,  the   orator  of the   Old   Czechs,  with  having  said:  "We  must  gather  up   the crumbs  of   our  rights   from  under  the   table  "   (speaking  of   joining the   ministry  and   Emperor).  The  Old  Czechs,  in   accepting  the Constitution  of   1867   and   the   Triple   Alliance,  had   sacrificed  their former  national  platform :   independence  of   the   Bohemian  crown, alliance  with  Russia,  and  hostility  to   Germany.  The  Young Czechs,  taking   up   this   program  together  with  their   democratic  demands, entered   upon   an  ardent  campaign  of   protestations,  massmeetings,  demonstrations  in   favour  of   France  and   Russia,*  which in   a   few   years  gained   them  the   majority  in   the   cities  and   rural districts  of   Bohemia.  The  Old  Czechs  became  alarmed,  and persuaded  the   Germans  in   Bohemia  to   resume  their  seats  in   the diet.  A   compact  was  agreed   upon   (1890),   but   a   number  of   the Old  Czechs,  the   "   realists,"  were  frightened  by   the   national  agitation of   the   Young  Czechs  and  dared  not  vote  for   it.   In   the Reichsrath  elected  in   1891   the   Young   Czech  party   had   36   deputies (against   12   for   the   Old   Czech  party).  They   produced  a doubly  revolutionary  platform:  in   national  affairs,  an   indc-

*   1887:   manifestations  by   students  for   Gregr   against  Rieger;  a   meeting of   20,000  persons,  where  Gregr   spoke   against  the   feudal  clerical  alliance, passed  a   resolution  declaring  that  the   Czech  people   did   not   wish  to   become a   nation  of   two  tongues,  that  it   wished  the   Czech  language  to   predominate, and   refused  to   renounce  the   rights   of   the   Bohemian  state.- 1888: scene  in   the   Diet   (January).  Popular  meeting,  program  :   Czech  State  with Czech  as   the   state  language,  coronation  of   the   King   in   Bohemia.- 1889   : the  reading  club  at   Prague  sent  delegates  to   Paris;  address  before  the Students'  Association:  "   We   adore  France."  The  Young  Czechs  demanded that  the  name  of   John   Huss  should  be   inscribed  upon  the  museum  at Prague;  the  Old  Czechs  refused  the  idea  as  an   insult  to   the   Catholic Church.- 1892:  delegation  to   the   Nancy   festival.

## 54^  THE   CONSTITUTIONAL   SYSTEM  IN  AUSTRIA.

pendent  Bohemia  for   Czechs  alone,  complete  equality  between Prague  and  Vienna,  decentralization  of   railroads;  in   political affairs,  universal  suffrage,  equality  of   labouring  classes,  diminution of   the   army.   It   supported  this   platform  with  violent speeches  and  fiery   scenes  in   the   Reichsrath,  where  it   introduced its   methods  of   popular  national  agitation.*

German-Polish  Coalition  and  Electoral  Reform  of   1896. - The Emperor  became  alarmed  by   the   growth  of   these  revolutionary parties,   threatening,  as   they   did,   both   his   domestic  policy   by   democratic claims   and   his   foreign   policy   by   assailing   the   German alliance.  The  Taaffe  ministry  wavered,  negotiated  first   with  the German  Left  (1892),  then  with  the   Czechs  (1893),  then  placed Prague  under  martial  law,   suspending  trial  by   jury   and  liberty of   the   press,  and   finally   brought  forward  a  scheme  of   radical electoral  reform.  In   the   two  classes  of   the   cities  and   rural  communes (which   elected  268   out  of   353   deputies)  it   proposed  to extend  the  right   of   voting  to  all   who  should  prove  a  sixmonths'  domicile  and   ability   to   read  and   write;   this   would  have increased  the   number  of   voters  from  1,500,000  to   4,500,000.

Meanwhile  a   democratic  movement  was  beginning  in   the   German cities   and   industrial  regions.  The   "   social  democratic  industrial party,"   built   after   the   German  model  (1888),   became strong  enough  to   organize  great   demonstrations,  May   Day   festivals in   favour  of   an  eight-hour  day   (1890-92),  and   petitions  for universal  suffrage.  In   Vienna,  where  the   population,  more  and more  heterogeneous,  was  composed  of   Germans,  Jewish  merchants, and   Czech   labourers,  an  anti-Semite  party   was   founded; it   was  a   coalition  of   revolutionists  and   Catholics,  which  finally won  the   municipal  council  of   Vienna  and   the   Diet  of   Lower  Austria. The   anti-Semite  movement  was  also   manifested  by   declarations to   the   Chamber  and  in   newspapers  and  street  riots.

The  Conservative  and  German  parties  combined  against  this project.  The  Emperor  came  to   an  understanding  with  them,   and formed  the  Windischgraetz  ministry  (November,  1893),  supported by   the   most  heterogeneous  coalition  that  had  yet   been seen  in   Austria:  the   German  parties   (Left,   Liberals,  and   Catho-

*i8gi:  Gregr  compared  Bohemia  to  a   lemon  squeezed  by   Austria;  the Czechs  feel   themselves  in   the   captivity  of   Babylon;  the   whole  Slavic  nation is   crushed  by   Austrian  centralization  as   if   in   the   arms  of   a   vampire. -  1892 (November  18):   Speech  by   Masaryk  against  Germanization ; Mayer  replied that   the   Germans  consider  it   an  act  of   high   treason  to   speak   of   the   State of   Bohemia;  his   voice  was  lost  in   the   clamour  of   Czech  and  Slovenian deputies.

lies),   the   Hohenwart  Club,   and   the   Polish  Club  opposing  the Young  Czechs,  friends  of   Russia.  In   order  to   quiet   the   agitation in   favour  of   electoral  reform,  the   ministry  proposed  to   create a   new  group  of   43   members  elected  by   universal  suffrage  (1894). But   the   coalition  could  not  agree  as   to   the   details,  and   it   fell   to pieces   on   the   question  of   a   public   grant   in   aid   of   a   Slovenian secondary  school  in   Styria.  The  German  Left  refused  to  vote for   the   grant  and   deserted  the   coalition,  whereupon  the   ministry resigned.

After  a   provisional  business  ministry  (June,   1895),   the   Badeni ministry  was   formed,  resting  on  a  coalition  of   the   Conservative parties,   the   Polish  Club,   the   Hohenwart  Club,   Liberal  party,  and Catholic  party,  with  a  policy   of   conciliation  o&gt;n  a   conservative basis:  to   take   account  at   once  of   the   claims  of   the   nationalities and  of   the   "   traditional  position  "   and   more  advanced  "   civilization "   of   the   German  people;   "   to   prevent  the   overthrow  of   social order  and   to   cultivate  the   religious  feelings   and   religious  education of   youth."

The  Polish  aristocratic  party   had   broken  with  the   Czechs,  now become  democrats  :   it   left   the   Slavic  coalition  to   join   a   coalition of   anti-democratic  Germans,  of   which  it   assumed  the   leadership. Badeni,  the   prime   minister,  and   Goluchowski,  the   common  minister of   foreign  affairs,  are   Poles.  The  conflict  was  now  between the   aristocratic  coalition,  supported  by   the   Emperor,  and the   new   democratic  parties,  the   Young   Czechs  in   Bohemia,  the socialists  and   anti-Semites  in   Austria.

The  government,  under  the  pressure  of   public  opinion,  has made  an  electoral  reform  (1896)   which,  without  changing  the former  classes,  creates  a   fifth   class  of   72   deputies,  elected  by   districts, by   universal  suffrage  (direct   in   six   large   cities,   indirect elsewhere).

Political  Struggles  in   Hungary  since  1878. - In   Hungary  the liberal  ministerial  party   preserved  a   sufficiently  large   majority  to carry  on  the  government.  It   continued  to   Magyarize  the schools,  and  accomplished  a  number  of   reforms  without  inconveniencing itself.   The   House   of   Magnates   was  reduced  in   membership (1886);   the   term  of   office   for   the   House  of   Deputies   was increased  from  three  to   five   years   (the   Left's  demands  for   extended suffrage   and   secret  ballot  were  rejected).  The   government took   possession  of   the   railroads,  and   adopted  the   famous zone  tariff  (1889).  The  ten-year  agreement  with  Austria  was renewed  without  difficulty  for   1888-98.  The   political  struggles

among  Magyars  'had  reference  to   secondary  questions  only.   The Left  struggled  against  the   ministry,  by   preventing  reform  in   the counties  (1891),   and  especially  by   organizing  great   demonstrations in   honour  of   Kossuth  (1890   and   1894).  The  right   had   opposed the   reform  of   the   ecclesiastical  system.  The   ministry  had finally   decided  (1893)   to   present  laws  for   the   establishment  of civil  marriage,  religious  liberty,  legal   equality  of   the   Jews. These  laws,   passed   in   the   House  by   both  the   left   and   the   ministerial party,   were  rejected   by   the   Magnates,  who   were  said   to have  the   secret  support  of   the   King.   Against  the   civil-marriage law   the   clergy   had   organized  an  agitation  all   over  the   country. It   was   finally   passed   when  the   ministry  secured  the   King's   permission to   create  new  magnates  to   make  up   a  majority  (1894). These  two  crises  caused  ministerial  changes.  The  Kossuth agitation  led  to   Tisza's  retirement  in  1890;  the  agitation against  civil   marriage,  in   1894,   forced  Wekerle  to   give   place   to Banffy.

The  struggle  was  more  intense  between  the   Magyars  and  the small  nationalities.

In   Croatia,  especially,  the   National  party,  excited  by   the   occupation of   the   new   Croat-speaking  provinces,  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina, had   once  more  taken   up   the   scheme  of   a   Greater  Croatia, which  should  be   independent  of   Hungary  and   joined   to   the   monarchy by   a   personal  union.  The  Agram  Diet  voted  an  address to   the   Emperor  (1878),  demanding  a  union  of   Dalmatia  and Bosnia.  In   renewing  the   Hungarian  compromise  it   demanded the   annexation  of   the   Military  Frontier  to   Croatia.  This  province, peopled   by   Croatian  soldiers,  had   been,   since  the   abolition of   its   special   government  (1866),   in   a  provisional  condition;  it was   finally   incorporated  with  Croatia  and   was  represented  in   the Agram  Diet.  The  Diet  also  demanded  the   port   of   Piume  (1881), but   Hungary  has   retained  her   provisional  governor  there.

Croatia,  now  enlarged,  kept   up   its   stolid  national  opposition against  the   Hungarian  government,  interspersed  with  violent outbreaks.  A   radical  party,  which  had   been  formed  by   the   side of   the   nationalist  ministerial  party,   demanded  a   personal  union. In   1883   the   Hungarian  minister  of   finance  had  set  up   over  the finance  offices  at   Agram  coats  of   arms  bearing  inscriptions  in both  Magyar  and  Croat.  A   mob  tore  them  down  and  the Ban  refused  to   restore  them.  The  Hungarian  government  sent soldiers  to   put   them  up   again,   appointed  another  Ban,   and  adjourned the   Diet;   it   then   resigned  itself  to   omitting  the   inscrip-

tions  from  the   coats  of   arms  (1883).  But  the   patriotic  agitation in   Croatia  had  been  so  vigorous  that  in   1884   the   Radical party   increased  from  17   to   24   deputies.  The  Hungarian  government ordered  the   Agram   archives  to   be   transported  to   BudaPesth  (1885);  this  gave  rise   to   violent  scenes  in   the   Diet;   two Radical  deputies  were  condemned  to   imprisonment.  The  government majority,   which   was  striving   to   maintain  the   union  with Hungary,  was  still  strong  enough  to  contend  against  the Greater-Croatia  party;  but  the   agitation  was  still  actively  carried on.   During   the   Emperor's  visit   to   Agram   a   Magyar  flag was  burned  by   the   students  (1895).

The  other  nationalities,  deprived  of   political  organization,  had almost  no  means  of   action  except  protest.  The  Slovacs  in   the northwest  tried  to  unite  with  the  Czechs  in   Bohemia  and Moravia,  who  were  their  neighbours  and  spoke  the  same  language. The   Magyar   government  and  the   Lutheran  clergy   replied by   forbidding  any  pastor  or   teacher  in   a   Slovac  country  to join   in   the   Slavic  propagandism  (1884).

Among  the   Serbs  in   the   south  a   little  separatist  party,   under the   direction  of   a   secret  society,   the   Omladina,  has   been  labouring since   1872   to   unite   the   whole  Servian  nation  under  the   government of   Servia.  The  National  party,   including  the  greater part   of   the   nation,   was  content  with  demanding  home  rule.  It protested  against  the   Magyar  government,  demanding  (1884) the   right,   granted   to   the   Serbs  in   1790,   1848,   and   1868,   of   electing their   Metropolitan  and   directing  church  and   school  matters. In   Croatia,  where  the   Serbs  differ  from  the   Croats  only   in   religion (Orthodox)  and   alphabet  (Slavonic),  the  independent "   Serb   party   of   Croatia,"  formed  after  the   annexation  of   the "   Military   Frontier,"  claimed  the   equality  of   the   Cyrillic   with   the Latin  alphabet,  and   the   revision  of   the   school  law   (1887).

The  Roumans,  who  were  almost  shut  out   from  representation by   the   electoral  system,   had   for   a   long   time   confined  themselves to   passive   protestation.  They   began,   in   1881,   to   demand  a   separate government  for   Transylvania.  Finally   they   sent  a   deputation to   "   the   Emperor   "   at   Vienna,  with  a   memorandum  (1892). The  Hungarian  government  had  the  leaders  tried  and  imprisoned (1895).   A   separatist  party,   connected  with   the   Irredentists of   Roumania,  had   begun   to   talk   of   "   Roumania  irredenta,"  and   to dream  of   separation  from  Hungary  and  union  with  the   Kingdom of   Roumania.

The  Saxons  have  finally   joined   the   Magyars  against   the   Rou-

man  agitation.*  On   the   other  hand,   the   small  nationalities  have tried  to  unite  against  their  Magyar  masters.  A   congress  of Roumans,  Slovacs,  and  Serbs  has   formed  an  alliance  for   the   defence of   local  autonomy  and   the   unity   of   the   kingdom  (1895).

Political  Evolution  of   Austria-Hungary  in   the  Nineteenth Century. - Austria  was  a  confused  mixture  of   races,  themselves a   combination  of   heterogeneous  elements  and   subject   to   an  absolutist and   aristocratic  monarchy.  The   government  maintained political  unity   and   reduced  the   nationalist  opposition  to   a   few demands  in   the   Hungarian  Diet,   and   elsewhere  to   simple   written protests.  But  this   system,  though  practicable  in   a   bureaucratic state,  was  not   in   harmony  with  representative  assemblies  fired with  racial  passion;  it   became  impossible  when  representative institutions  were  granted.  The  revolution  of   1848   suddenly  revealed the   national  antagonisms;  it   established  dualism,  that   is to   say,   division  of   the   monarchy  between  the   two   leading   races, Magyars  and  Germans.  But  as   both  had   joined   the   democratic parliamentary  party,  the   monarchical  government  crushed  them with  the   aid   of   the   Slavs,   who   remained  submissive  to   the   Empire, and   restored  absolutism,  completed  by   clerical  control.

The  military  defeats  of   1859   and   1866   and   the   loss   of   its   credit made  the   German  government  decide  to  adopt   a   liberal  constitutional system.   It   first   attempted  to   maintain  the   unity   of   the whole  Empire,  then,   yielding  to   the   unanimous  resistance  of   the Magyars,  it   took  the   bold  course  of   abandoning  to   the   Magyars all   the   countries  under  the   crown  of   St.   Stephen.  There  a   Magyar state  grew  up   with   a   liberal  and   semi-aristocratic  parliamentary government,  strong  enough   to   impose   its   will   on   the small  nationalities,  but   obliged   to   let   the   Croats  make  themselves a   self-governing  state.

With  the   rest  of   the   Empire  the   German  government  began once  more  to   organize  a  unitary  constitutional  system.  It   succeeded, by   means  of   an  electoral  system   favouring  the   Germans and  property  holders,  in   setting   up   this   system.  At   one  time  it united  the   German  liberals  with  the  aristocracy  (1867-68);  at another  it   joined   the   German  aristocracy  with  the   Slavic  aristoc-

*The  anti-Semite  agitation  may   be  included  among  the  nationalist struggles.  It   has  been  violently  manifested  by   the  prosecution  of   the Jews   of   Tisza-Eslar,  who  were  accused  of   the   ritual  murder  of   a   young  girl (1882-83),  an^  by   the   formation  of   an  anti-Semite  party   (17   in   the   Diet  of 1884).  The  Socialist  agitation  has  been  limited  tp   the  capital,  and  has been  of   no  political  importance.

racies  (1879-93).  But   it   has   been   obliged   to   sacrifice  to   the   latter a   part   of   its   liberal  and   anti-clerical  policy   (established  after   1867) and   a   part   of   the   former  predominance  of   the   German  language; it   has   let   Austria  slip   back  toward  the   old   system,  under  the authority  of   nobles  and  clergy.  Then,  a  new  democratic  party, by   an  appeal   to   patriotism,  won  the   Czechs;  the   government, alarmed  at   the   growth  of   democracy,  has   therefore  made  good the   loss   of   the   Czech  party   by   taking   in   the   German  liberal party.  It   rests  on  an  anti-democratic  coalition,  directed  by   the Poles.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.*

BIBLIOGRAPHY.- Bibliographies  will  be  found  in   the  works  mentioned under   chap,   xiii.,   Waitz,   Krones,   Leger.

DOCUMENTS. - The  parliamentary  reports  and  law  collections  are indicated  in   Miihlbrecht,  "   Wegweiser  zur  Literatur  der  Staatswissenschaften."  Practically  all   the  documents  and  important  facts  maybe found  in   Schulthess,  "   Europaischer  Geschichtskalender,"  i   vol.   a   year  since 1860;   Austria-Hungary  is   one  of   the   best  treated  parts,   but   from  a   standpoint very   hostile  to   the   Slavs   and   Magyars.- See   also   the   "   Annuaire  des Deux  Mondes,"  up   to   1870,   and   the   "   Annual  Register."

For  party   history  see   the   reviews,  the   "   Grenzboten,"  the   "Preussische Jahrbucher,"  the  "Deutsche  Rundschau"  since  1874,  the  "Deutsche Revue  "   since  1877,   "   Unsere  Zeit,"   and   the   "   Revue  Polit.  et   Parlementaire  "   since  1894.

WORKS.- For  general  histories,  Zrones,  Leger,  see  chap,   xiii.- W.   Rogge, "   Oesterreich  von   Vilagos  bis   zur   Gegenwart,"  3   vols.,  1872-73;  ·'   Oesterr. seit  der  Katastrophe  Hohenwart-Beust,"  2  vols.,  1879;  stops  at  the Eastern  crisis;  a   journalistic  work,  very  partial  to   the   Germans.

ON  NATIONALITIES. - There  is   a  collection  of   descriptive  monographs, ' '   Die   Volker  Oesterreich-Ungarns."  I   prefer   not  to   mention  the   nationalist controversial  writings,  Czech,  Magyar,  German,  and  Polish,  like  that  of Eieger,  "   Le   Royaume  de   Boheme,"  1867,  Heinze,  "   Hungarica,"  1882; they   are  very  numerous  and  of   little  historic  value.

ON  INSTITUTIONS  :   See  the  bibl.  in   Ulbrich,  "   Oesterreichisches  Staatsrecht,"  1892,   Marquardsen  coll.- Jellinek,  "   Ungarisches  Staatsrecht,' same  coll.,  is   announced. - The  principal  treatises  are  Ulbrich,  "   Lehrbuch des  Oesterr.  Staatsrechts,"  1883;  "   Handbuch  der  Oesterr.  Politischen Verwaltung,"  2   vols.  and  i   supplem.,  1888-92.  Since  1895   a   dictionary  has been  published  under  the  direction  of   Mischler  and  TJlbrich,  "   Oesterr. Staatsworterbuch."- In  English,  Lowell,  "Governments  and  Parties," vol.  ii.  - de   Worms,  "Count  Beust." - Forster,  "Life  of   Deak."- Dilka, "   Present  Position  of   European  Politics." - Valuable  articles  maybe  found in   the   English   reviews,  particularly  the   Westminster.

*My  ignorance  of   the   Magyar  and  Slavic  tongues  prevents  my  preparing a   truly   scientific  bibliog.

## CHAPTER  XVIII.

## THE   SCANDINAVIAN    COUNTRIES.

Formation  of   the   Scandinavian  States. - The   three  Scandinavian countries,  Sweden,  Norway,  and  Denmark,  are  ancient  states formed  during  the   Middle  Ages.  The  three  peoples  are  alike in   their   origin,   language,  religion,  and   conditions  of   life;   they have  passed  through  similar  evolutions  and  their  histories  are parallel  up   to   the   nineteenth  century.

The  political  situation  of   the   three  countries  was  upset   by   the wars  with  the  French  Empire.  The  modern  political  life  of Scandinavia,  like   that   of   Switzerland,  the   Netherlands,  Italy,   the Iberian  peninsula,  and   Germany,  was  aroused  by   the   intervention of   France.

Sweden,  during  Napoleon's  alliance  with  the   Tsar,   was  conquered by   Russia,  which  detached  the   Grand  Duchy  of   Finland from  the   kingdom.  Irritated  by   the   incapacity  of   their  King, the   Swedes  revolted  and  imposed  upon   him  a  sort  of   constitution (the   form   of   government  of   1809),   which  replaced  the   absolute royalty   by   an  aristocratic  government.

A   French  general,  Bernadotte,  who  directed  the   occupation  of Swedish  Pomerania,  conciliated  the  Swedish  aristocracy;  the King,   who   had   no  children,  adopted  him   as   his   heir;   Bernadotte, as  prince   royal,   governed  in   the   King's   place   and  joined   the Russo-English  alliance  against  Napoleon.  The  King   of   Denmark, the   absolute  sovereign  of   the   two   kingdoms  of   Denmark and   Norway,  remained  Napoleon's  ally ;   the   Allies  promised  Norway to   Bernadotte.  After  the   fall   of   Napoleon,  the   Danish  King was  obliged  to   cede  Norway  to   Sweden  (Peace   of   Kiel,   January, 1814),   retaining  only   Denmark  and  the   duchies  of   SchleswigHolstein.

Norway,  which  for   four   centuries  had   been  treated  as  a   remote province  by   the   Danish  government,  had   lost   all   political  interest. The   Norwegians,  speaking  Danish  and  having  no  other literature  but   the   Danish,  did   not   feel   themselves  a.   distinct  race. The  Norwegian  patriotic  party   did  not  appear  until  1810;   it

554

founded  the   "   Society   for   the   good   of   the   Norwegian  people," then   raised  subscriptions  for   a   Norwegian  university  (1811).

National  sentiment  grew  rapidly.  When  the  news  came  of the   cession  of   Norway  to   Sweden  the   Norwegians  determined  not to   submit  to   it.   The  Danish  prince  who,   under  the  title  of viceroy,  governed  Norway,  wished  to  take  advantage  of   this movement  to   declare  himself  King   of   Norway.  But  instead  of declaring  himself  an  absolute  King,   as   he   had   first   intended,  he followed  the   advice  of   Professor  Sverdrup,  and   appealed  to   the nation.  He   convoked  an  assembly  of   notables,  then  a   Diet  of 112  members  formed  of   elected  representatives  and   office-holders. The  Diet  declared  that   the   crown  of   Norway  had   been  restored to   the   people   by   the   Danish  King's   renunciation,  and  elected Prince  Christian  Frederick  King   (May   17,   1814).  It   then  voted a   constitution  similar  to   the   French  Constitution  of   1791,   founded on   the   sovereignty  of   the   people,   represented  by   an   indissoluble, elective  assembly.

Bernadotte  came  to   take   possession  of   the   country  and   offered the   Norwegians  a   viceroy   and   a   constitution.  The  Norwegians refused.  Then  war  began,  and  the  Swedes  were  driven  back. But   it   was   impossible  for   Norway  to   resist  the   formal  order  of the   great   European  powers.  Christian  therefore  convoked  the representative  assembly  and  induced  it   to   accept   his   resignation of   the   crown.  But   the   assembly,  while  yielding  to   the   King   of Sweden,  maintained  the   principle  of   the   sovereignty  of   the   people; it   elected  Charles  XIII.  King   of   Norway,  on  condition  that he   should  recognise  the   Constitution  of   1814.

A   convention  made  terms  between  the   two  countries  (1815). There  should  be   a   King   of   Sweden  and   Norway,  a   common  sovereign in   all   foreign   relations  (war   and   diplomacy);  but   the   two peoples  should  each  preserve  its   own  constitution  and  government; Norway   had   its   Council  of   State,   performing  the   offices  of a   ministry,  its   Assembly,  its   Supreme  Court,   its   capital   at   Christiania,  and   its   bank  at   Drontheim.

There  were  henceforth  three  distinct  Scandinavian  states. Norway  has  the   same  King   as   Sweden  and  the   same  language as   Denmark.  All  three  have  established  the   Lutheran  Church. All   three  have  experienced  during  the  nineteenth  century  an economic,  political,  and  literary  revival.  All   three  have  established religious   liberty.   This   evolution  has   been   parallel,   but   to understand  it   in   detail  each  country  must  be   looked  into separately.

SWEDEN.

Transformation  of   the   Swedish  Constitution. - Swedish  society remained  aristocratic  until  the   nineteenth  century.  The  south (Scania)  was  a   region   of   large   landowners;  the   rest,   where  the soil   is   less   fertile,   has   only   a   scattered  population  of   peasants  and fishermen,  with  several  mining  districts  and  a   few   cities.  The court,  nobles,  military  officers,  office-holders,  and  Lutheran clergy   form  the   active  part   of   the   nation  and   rule   the   people; political  life   is   centred  about  the   King   at   Stockholm.

The  first  reform  was  one  of   government.  The  Council  of State  in   1840   took  the   modern  form  of   a   ministry  divided  into seven  departments,  each  forming  a  service,  under  the   direction of   a   Councillor  of   State  (foreign  affairs,   defence,  navy,   justice, interior,  finance,  education).  Measures  are  examined  by   each head  of   a   department,  then  by   the   Council;  the   King   signs   the decision,  which  must  then  be   countersigned  by   the   head  of   the department  concerned  (except  in   military  matters).

Sweden  had  preserved  all   her   old   institutions:  the   Council  of State,   performing  the   office  of   a   ministry, - the   Diet,   divided  into four  orders,  nobles,  clergy,  citizens,  and  peasants,  voting   separately,- the   Lutheran  Church  as   the   state  church,  the   practice of   any   other  religion   being   prohibited, - the   army   (indelta)  maintained by   assignments  of   land.  Since  1809   the   King   had   been unable  to   decide  any  question  except  in   the   Council  of   State, which  was  composed  of   two  ministers,  four  secretaries  of   state, a  chancellor,  and  six   councillors,  collectively  responsible;  the government  could  make  laws  only   through  the   Diet.

Next  religious  freedom  was  established.  The  ordinance  of 1826  on  conventicles,  which  forbade  laymen  to   hold  public   religious meetings,   was  repealed   in   1858.   Religious  tolerance  was brought  into  practice;  and   the   law   abolished  by   which  only   supporters of   "   the   pure   evangelical  doctrine  "   could  hold  offices.  In spite   of   the   protests  of   the   Synod   and   the   supreme  court  of   justice, a   special  law   recognised  in   Dissenters  the   right   to   spread their  religion,  at   the   same  time   reserving  to   recognised  religious societies  the   exclusive  right   of   carrying  on  public   worship.  The Jews,   who  until  then  had   been  confined  to   four  cities,   were  permitted to   settle  in   all   parts   of   the   kingdom  (1873),

The  distribution  of   representation  had  not   been  revised,  and so  was  grossly  disproportionate  to  existing  conditions.  It   was estimated,  in   1858,   that,   out  of   3,000,000  inhabitants,  possessing

537,000,000  rixdalers,  1,194,000,  possessing  245,000,000,  were  cut off   from  representation;  and,   owing   to   the   system  of   voting   by orders,  27,000  men,  possessing  52,000,000  rixdalers,  were  sufficient to   counterbalance  the   vote  of   2,478,000,  possessing 340,000,000.

The  great  constitutional  reform  was  the   transformation  of   the Diet.  A   reform  committee  was  formed,  which  organized  a   campaign of   petitions.  The  two  lower  orders,  citizens  and   peasants, prayed  the   King   to   present  a   reform  scheme;  the   two  privileged orders,  nobles  and  clergy,  voted  against  it   (1860).  The  King then   took   the   part   of   the   reformers.  The   first   step   was  to   establish local   assemblies  (Landsting);  they   were  to   be   elected  by property-holders,  without  distinction  of   order.  Then  the   government presented   a   plan   for   the   complete   revision  of   the   Diet (1863).

In   1865   (the   legal   date   of   the   new  constitution  is   1866)   the   two privileged  orders  resigned  themselves  to   voting   the   King's   plan (the   nobles  by   361   votes  against  294).   This  was  a  radical  reform. The   old   Diet   of   States-General,  with  its   short  and irregular  sessions,  was  transformed  into  a   modern  type   of   parliament, with   an  annual  session  of   four  months.  The  Diet  was composed  of   two  Chambers.  The  "   first  Chamber  "   was  aristocratic, composed   of   representatives  from   the   25   local   assemblies, and  of   representatives  from  the   cities,   in   the   proportion  of   I   for every  30,000   inhabitants,  elected  for   nine   years,  with   a   high   property qualification  and   no  pay   for   services.  The   "   second  Chamber "   was  composed  of   deputies  elected  for   three  years   by   the propertied  classes  and  receiving  a  salary.  The  proportion  of deputies  was  I   for   each  rural  district  up   to   40,000  population, and  i   for   every  10,000  in   the   cities.  This  gave  the   cities  a decided  electoral  advantage.  The  two  Chambers  had  the   same powers;  they   were  to  make  the   laws  and  the   budget.  If   they should  disagree  on   financial  questions,  they   were  to  meet  together, and   the   vote  of   the   majority   was  to   prevail   (a   Scandinavian practice). ber

Swedish  Parties. - In   Sweden,  as   in   the   other  Scandinavian states,  parties   were  formed  in   an  exactly  opposite  fashion  from the   rest  of   Europe.  The  cities,   where  the   court  and   the   officials predominated,  formed  the   aristocratic  conservative  party   (right), disposed  to   support  the   ministers  chosen  by   the   King.   The   rural districts  formed  the   democratic  party   (left),   which  opposed  the ministry.

The  right   had   called  itself  the   "   intelligent  party   ";   its   members were  of   the   cultivated  classes;  the   left,   composed  mainly   of   peasants, had   taken   the   name  of   the   "   rustic  party."  As   in   the   other Scandinavian  countries,  the   struggle  came  over  the   budget  of expenses,  especially  military  (army   and  navy).  The  King   and his   ministers,  continuing  the   Swedish  military  tradition,  perhaps also  influenced  by   the  example  of   the  German  monarchies, wished  to   reorganize  the   army  on   the   Prussian  model,  establishing a   permanent  army  and  expending  great  sums  on  the   building up   of   a   navy.   The   left,   above  all   bent   on  economy,  rejected   these expenditures  as  useless  for   a   people   threatened  by   no  enemy;  it demanded  that  the   army  should  be   remodelled  on   the   Swiss  plan, as  a   national  militia.

Relations  between  the   ministry  and   the   Second  Chamber  have been  regulated  according  to   the   usages  of   a   constitutional  monarchy, and   the   King   has   avoided  establishing  the   parliamentary system;  he   has   continued  to   choose  his   ministers  outside  of   the majority.  The  Chamber,  deprived  of   means  of   constraint,  cannot get   control  of   the   government;  it   has   only   its   power  of   resistance to   ministerial  projects.

Conflict  began   in   1871   over  the   question  of   military  reform: the   left   demanded  that   the   "   antiquated  system   "   of   the   indelta should  be   abolished;  the   government  plan   was  passed  by   the First   Chamber,  but   rejected  by   the   Second  Chamber  (105   against 79)-

The  ministry  kept   its   majority  in   the   Diet  (the   two   Chambers voting   together),  owing   to   the   votes  of   the   aristocratic  and   ministerial upper   House.  But   as   early   as   1875   the   left   had   a   majority, even  in   the   Diet   (155   against   141).   The   ministry  has   continued to   present   its   schemes,  the   Diet   has   continued  to   reject   them;   the military  reform  has   not   been  accomplished.  But   the   conflict  has not   become  sharp   as   in   the   other  Scandinavian  countries.  The King   has   admitted  to   the   ministry  the   leaders  of   the   moderate section  of   the   rustic  party.

Then,  the   classification  of   parties   has   changed.  A   new   democratic party   has   been   formed  in   the   cities,   more  radical  than   the Rustics.  In  1884  the  Conservative  party  lost  Stockholm. Meanwhile  the   question  of   taxation  was   breaking  up   the   old   parties. The   price   of   grain   had   fallen  greatly,   and   a   party   had formed  about  1880  to   demand  an   increase  of   import  duties  on grain.  The  ministry,  which  had  always  advocated  free  trade, resisted  for   a   long   time.  In   1886   the   protectionists  had   a   small

majority  in   the   lower  Chamber,  though   still   insufficient  to   counterbalance the   great   free-trade  majority  in   the   upper   Chamber. In   1887   the   ministry,  having   appealed  to   the   nation  by   a   dissolution (the   first   since   the   reform  of   the   Diet),   the   free-trade  government party   had   only   100  votes  in   222.  The   majority  depended on   the   election  in   Stockholm,  which  had   returned  22   democrats; it   was  annulled  because  one  of   those  elected  had   not   fulfilled  the property  qualification  required  by   law,   and  the   protectionist ticket  was  declared  elected.  The  ministry  resigned,  and  protective measures  were  passed.  But   in   1892   the   free-traders  re^ gained  the   majority  (142   against  86)   in   the   Second  Chamber (128   against  102,   in   1896).

The  socialist  party   had  just   been  organized  (1889),  on  the model  of   the   German  socialists,  by   founding  political  societies and   syndicates  of   workingmen.  It   began   its   agitation  with   a   press campaign  and  a   demonstration  in   favour  of   the   eight-hour  day (1890).  The  government  replied  with  prosecutions  for   high   treason or   blasphemy,  condemning  to   prison   all   the   editors  of   the socialist  organ.  The  socialist  party,  powerless  to   effect  the   election of   its   candidates  by   propertied  voters,   joined   the   democratic party   in   an  appeal   for   universal  suffrage.  The   two  united  parties organized  an  election  for   a   "   people's  Diet."  This  private   Diet, held  in   1893,   presented  to   the   King   an  address  in   favour  of   universal suffrage.   The   Rustics  divided  on   this   question  (1893); one  part   joined   the   right   to   defeat  the   electoral  reform  (the   First Chamber  rejected  it   again   in   1896).   The   government,  disturbed by   the   agitation  in   the   cities,   carried,  in   1894,   a   law   which,   by reducing  the   number  of   deputies  to   230,   lessens  the   proportion  of deputies  from  the   cities.  Political  life   has   turned,  since  that   year, on   the   conflict  with   Norway  (see   p.   565)son

## NORWAY.

The  Democratic  Party, - After  the  union  with  Sweden,  Norway had   the   most   democratic  form  of   social  and   political   constitution to   be   found  in   Europe.  The  separation  from  Denmark had  removed  the  controlling  Danish  classes;  there  remained almost  nothing  of   the   Norwegian  nobility;  the   officials  were  few in   number  and   centred  at   Christiania,  a   capital   without  a   court. Society  was  reduced  to   peasants  (who   were  almost  all   landowners), merchants,  sailors,   and   pastors.   It   has   been   steadily   democratic in   character.

The  government  was  monarchical  in   form;  but   the   King   was  a foreigner  and  seen  in   Norway  only   when  the   Assembly  met; he   therefore  had   but   little   personal  influence.  The   Constitution of   1814,   based,   like   the   French  Constitution  of   1791,   on   the   doctrine of   the   separation  of   the   powers,  was  so  constructed  as   to make  the  Assembly  entirely  independent  of   the   King.  Unlike that   of   other   monarchical  governments,  it   could  not   be   dissolved and  it   could  make  laws  against   the   will   of   the   King  - though,   to tell   the   truth,   it   was   by   a   slow   process.  When  a   measure  is   rejected by   the   Kipg   it   must,   in   order  to   become  a   law,   be   voted  by three  successive  Assemblies  with  intervals  of   three  years   between the   votes.

The  Assembly  (Storthing)  was  elected  for   a  short  term  (three years)   by   indirect  election,  by   an  electoral  body   which  was  very democratic  for   the   period,   for   it   included  every   landholder,  every city   burgher,  and   every  possessor  of   an   income  of   500   krones  in the   country  or   800   krones  in   the   city.*  The  Assembly  was divided  into  two  Chambers,  which  sat  separately.  The  Upper Chamber  (Lagthing)  was,   however,  only   a   fragment  of   the   Storthing, formed  of   a   quarter   of   the   members  elected  by   the   whole. The  remaining  three-fourths  constituted  the   Odelsthing,  with  the sole   right   of   inspecting  the   accounts.  In   case  of   disagreement over  a   projected  law   the   two   Chambers  voted  together,  and   the project   must  in   this   case   have   a   two-thirds  majority.

The  King   chose  the   Council  of   State,   which  wielded  the   executive power.   This  Council,  formed  of   two  ministers  and  nine councillors,  was  cut   into   two  sections:  a   minister  and   two  councillors composed   the   delegation  to   be   with   the   King   at   Stockholm; the   others   remained  at   Christiania  and   composed  the   ministry. Following  the   doctrine  of   the   separation  of   the   powers Councillors  of   State  could  not   be   deputies  or  even  enter  the Storthing  hall.

Political  life   at   first   commanded  little   interest.  The   Storthing held   only   one  session  of   two  months  in   three  years.   It   was,   however, divided  into   two   parties   on   the   same  principle   as   in   Sweden. The  democratic  party,  composed  of   representatives  from  the peasant  classes,  opposed  the   expenditure  proposed  by   the   government; the   right,   which  favoured  the   ministry,  was  supported by   the   deputies  from  the   capital.  But   from  the   beginning,  the left   had   the   majority;  it   had   the   advantage  of   appearing  as   the

*   A   Krone  is   roughly  equal   to   a   quarter  of   a   dollar.

Norwegian  patriots'  party,  as  opposed  to  the   government  party representing  a   foreign  king.

Charles  XIV.  (Bernadotte)  was  in   conflict  with  the   Norwegians throughout  his   reign .(1818-44):  conflict  over  the   civil   list; conflict  over  the   abolition  of   the   nobility,  which  the   Storthing  demanded in   three  successive  votes;  conflict  over  the   reform  of the  constitution  (the   King   wished  to  secure  for   himself  the same  powers  that  were  enjoyed  by   the  kings   of   other  monarchies: veto,   right   of   dissolution,  appointment  of   presiding officers;  the   Storthing  rejected  all   his   amendments  in   1824;   conflict in   1829   with  students  who  were  celebrating  the   anniversary of   the   Norwegian  constitution  instead  of   the   anniversary  of the   union  with   Sweden  (the   King   sent  troops  tu   disperse  them) ; conflict  over  the   choice  of   the   viceroy   for   Norway.  This   time   the King   went  so   far   as   to   dissolve  the   Storthing,  which  retorted  by impeaching  the   ministry  for   having   advised  the   King   to   violate the   constitution;  the   ministry  was  condemned  to   pay   a   fine,   and the   King   yielded,   taking   a   Norwegian  for   his   viceroy.

The  two  succeeding  Kings,  Oscar  I.   (1844-59)  an(^  Charles XV.  (1859-72),  lived  in   peace  with  the   Storthing.  Oscar  recognised the   national  flag   of   Norway   and   gave  up   the   right   of   appointing a  viceroy  (the   charge  was  abolished  in   1873).  Religious liberty,   which   had   been   forgotten  in   the   constitution,  was established  by   laws.  The  law  on   Dissenters  (1845)   gave   to   all Christian  sects  the   right   to*   establish  communities  and   to   practice their  religion.  Jews   were  given   the   same  privilege  in   1851.   Universal religious   liberty   was  granted   in   1878.   Lutheranism  remained compulsory  for   office-holders,  however.  The   Storthing session  was  made  annual  (1869),  and  this  increased  political activity   in   Norway.

Prosperity  increased  rapidly.  Norway  had  never  been  so populous  or  so  rich.  The  population  had  increased  from  less than  1,200,000  souls  in   1835   to   1,800,000  in   1875   (2,000,000  in 1891);   the   population  of   the   cities  from  135,000   in   1832   to   332,ooo   in   1875.   The   debt,   which  had   been   very   heavy   in   1815,   was paid   off   In   1850.   The   customs  duties,  growing  more  and   more productive,  were  sufficient  to  cover  the   expenses  of   the   state. The  little  Norwegian  people  owned  a   fourth  of   the   merchant marine  of   Europe:  in   1879   56,000   sailors  and   7800   ships,   not   to mention  the   fishermen,  who  in   1890   were  estimated  at   120,000. The  land  was  divided  among  a  great  number  of   peasants.  The

number  of  landowners  had  increased  from  45,000  in   1814 to  105,000  in  1835.  There  remained  no  great  propertyholders.

The  Constitutional  Conflict. - With- Oscar  II.   (1872)   began   the great   conflict  for   reform  of   the   constitution.  Hitherto  the   democratic party,   abiding   by   the   terms  of   the   Constitution  of   1814, had   simply   tried  to   restrict  the   government  by   reducing  the   budget. It   had   at   first   even  refused  to   change   the   law   forbidding Councillors  of   State  to   join   in   meetings  of   the   Assemblies,  for fear   of   their   gaining   a   personal  influence  over  the   deputies.  It held  the   old   doctrine,  the   doctrine  maintained  by   the   French  Constitution of   1791.  Later  it   had   proposed  a   law   (1851)   which  permitted the   Councillors  of   State  to   take   part   in   the   meetings  of   the Storthing.  The  King   had   rejected  it. get.

In   1872   the   democratic  party   changed  its   policy;   it   endeavoured to   get   control  of   the   Council  of   State,   to   compel   the   King   to choose  his   ministers  from  the   majority  in   the   Storthing,  thus  replacing the   separatist  system   by   the   English  parliamentary  system. The   constitution  forbade  ministers  to   sit   in   the   Storthing; the   democratic  party   passed   a   law   to   permit   it.   Thereupon  began the   conflict  between  the   King   and   the   Storthing.  The   King declared  that   the   Storthing  had   no  power  to   change   the   constitution without  the   consent  of   both   powers,   King   and   Storthing;  as the   constitution  had   established  no  other  procedure  for   revision, the   change   could  be   made  only   by   agreement.  He   would  willingly consent  to   the   innovation,  but   in   return  asked  the   right   of dissolving  the   Assembly,  as   in   parliamentary  monarchies.  The majority  in   the   Storthing  looked  at   the   question  in   a   different light.  It   declared  that,   as   the   constitution  had   made  no   distinction between  laws  and   constitutional  amendments,  a   law  was sufficient  to   change   the   constitution,  and   this   could  be   passed over  the   King's   veto.  It   therefore  passed   the   law   giving   the ministers  entrance  to   the   Storthing;  the   King   refused  his   sanction; but,   in   accordance  with  the   rules  of   Norwegian  procedure, the   Storthing  passed   the   measure  three  times  (1872-77-80)  and passed  several  formal  votes  of   censure  against  the   ministry. tem.

The  King   refused  to   recognise  the   law,   even  after  the   third vote,  and  chose  "   fighting  ministers  "   pledged  to  resistance (1880).  The  Storthing  had  no   lawful  means  of   action;  according to   the   doctrine  of   the   separation  of   powers,  the   King,   in   his choice  of   ministers,  was  under  no  obligation  to   pay  attention  to the   votes  of   the   Assembly.  The  breach  widened.  The  two

powers,  both  King   and  Storthing,  refused  to   yield.   The  Storthing replaced   the   formula  "   Most  Gracious  Majesty  "   with  the words  "   To   the   King."  The  King   secured  from  the  Law Faculty  of   Christiania  a   favourable  opinion  on   his   theory.  In Sweden  there  was  talk   of   employing  force;  in   Norway  a   society was  established  to  arm  volunteers.  There  remained  but  one process,  which  was  to   impeach  the   Council  of   State;   but   the   outcome of   the   attempt  was   doubtful.  According  to   the   constitution, impeached  ministers  must  be   tried  by   a   court  composed  of 9 judges  from  the   High   Court  of   Justice   and   22  members  of   the Lagthing,  and   the   accused  had   the   right   to   challenge  a   third  of them.  Nothing  could  be   expected  of   the   judges,  who  were  dependent on   the   government  ;   the   members  of   the   Lagthing  alone could  be   expected  to   decide  the   conflict  against   the   King.

The  elections  of   November,  1882,   were  decisive.  The  Left  had 83   members  elected,  the   Conservatives  31.   The  Left  used  its majority  to   elect  a   Lagthing  disposed  to   condemn  the   ministry. The  trial  was  a   long   one.  The   Odelthing  accused  the   ministers of   having   acted  contrary  to   the   interests  of   the   country   by   advising the   King   to   refuse  his   sanction  to   the   constitutional  amendment; the   court   declared  the   ministers  guilty   and   condemned them  to   dismissal  (1884).

This  time  the   King   yielded   and   accepted  the   judgment.  He did,   however, attempt  to   forma  Conservative  ministry, but   no  one dared  accept  a   place   in   it.   The   King   finally   resigned  himself  to charging  Sverdrup,  leader  of   the   Left,   with  the   formation  of   a ministry  (1884).  This  was  a  radical  change;  Norway  made  a sudden  leap   from  constitutional  monarchy  to  the   parliamentary system.  The  Council  of   State  became  a  ministry  politically  responsible to   the   Storthing.  The  power,   hitherto  exercised  by   the King,   the   Christiania  officials,  and   the   conservative  party,  passed into  the   hands  of   the   representatives  of   the   Norwegian  people under  the   control  of   the   peasant   democratic  party.

The  National  Conflict. - The  accession  of   the   leader  of   the   Left to   power   did   not  end   the   conflict;  it   simply   gave   it   a   new   direction. The   party   which   had   conquered  the   King   was  a   loose  coalition of   the   various  opposition  groups;  by   the   side  of   the   old peasant  Left,   which  was  still   composed  of   monarchists  and   intolerant Lutherans,  there  had   sprung  up,   within  a   generation,  a more  radical  group,  whose  members  belonged  in   large   part   to   the cities  and   ports.   It   was   indifferent  or   hostile  to   the   Church,  and was  led   by   the   novelist  Bjornstern  Bjornson.

During  the   struggle  against   the   King,   Sverdrup  had   produced a   program  of   democratic  reforms  :   extension  of   the   suffrage,   establishment of   jury   trial,   reorganization  of   the   army,  and   development of   education  (1882).  On  these  reforms  the  Left  was  in harmony,  but   the   understanding  was   broken  up   on  a   question  of Church  policy.  Sverdrup,  influenced  by   his   nephew  John,   an Orthodox  pastor,  caused  the   rejection  of   the   pension  proposed for   the   writer,   Kielland,  because  the   latter  had   expressed  antiChristian  views  (1885).  Sverdrup  proposed  a   bill  on  parish councils  (1886)   which  gave   the   councils  the   right   to   strike  from the   voting   lis*t   the   name  of   anyone  who   should  have  broken  away from  the   Church  or  who  led   an   immoral  life.  (In   Norway  the parish   is   identical  with  the   civil   commune;  this   bill   would  give the   Orthodox  believers  a   discretionary  power  over  the   elections.) The  democratic  party   broke  into  two  parts;  the   Old  Left,   supporting Sverdrup,   and   the   New   Left,   under  Bjornson,  attacking him  (1886).* ment

The  two  groups  continued  to  vote  together  on  the   electoral law   (1884),   introduction  of   jury   trial,   and   the   reorganization  of the   army  as  a   militia  (1887).  But   the   New  Left  demanded  the dismissal  of   John   Sverdrup  and  defeated  the   parish   law   in   the Storthing  (84   against  i).   Sverdrup,  though  put   in   a  minority, refused  to   resign,   invoking  the   anti-parliamentary  theory   which he   had   been  fighting  all   his   life.  Then,   to   maintain  his   position, he   joined   the   Right,   which  enabled  him   to   defeat  a   vote  of   want of   confidence  by6i   votes  (of   which  30   were  Conservative)  against 51   (1888).  He   even  spoke   of   the   necessity  of   winning  the   confidence of   "   the   master  of   the   ministry   "   (the   King).   The   mass  of the   democrats  followed  the   New  Left.  The  delegates  from  the democratic  clubs,   who   met  at   Drontheim  in   July,   1887,   adopted  as their  platform  universal  suffrage,  the   parliamentary  system   (that is,   the   resignation  of   a   defeated  ministry),  and   the   establishment of   special   consuls  for   Norway.  By   this   last   article  the   New  Left appealed  to   patriotism  against  the   King   of   Sweden.

Henceforth  there  were  three  parties :   Conservative,  Ministerial, and  Radical.  In   the   elections  of   1889   the   coalition  of   Ministerialists and   Conservatives  retained  their  majority:  22   Ministerialists, 54   Conservatives,  38   Radicals.  But  the  Ministerial party  was  too  far   reduced  to   maintain  its   foothold.  The  Conservatives, who   were  now   the   largest   party   relatively,  defeated terialists,

*   Bjornson's  adversaries  called  it   the   "literary"  or  "European  Left," because  it   introduced  foreign  ideas  into  Norway.

Sverdrup,  and   the   King   took   a   Conservative  "   fighting   ministry," under  Stang   (1889).

Then  began  the   democratic  and   patriotic  agitation  against   the King   of   Sweden.  The  factory  system  had  been  introduced  into Norway,  and  had  created  a   labouring  class.  A   socialist  party had  just   been  formed  among  the   workingmen  (1887)   and  had secured  the   support  of   the   congress  of   trade  unions  (1889).  Another Radical  workingman's  party,  represented  by   the   federation of   the   leagues   of   Norwegian  workingmen,  demanded woman's  suffrage,  a  progressive  income  and  inheritance  tax, tion

When  the  Conservative  ministry  presented  a   bill   to   regulate relations  between  Sweden  and  Norway,  the  two  groups  of   the Left   united  and   left   the   government  in   minority  (February,  1891). The  King   decided  to   call   on  one  of   the   Radical  leaders  Steen. The  Steen  ministry  did   not   have  at   first   a   majority  in   the   Storthing, but   gained   a   majority   in   the   elections  of   1891.   The   party had  adopted  a  platform  of   universal  suffrage,  direct  taxes,  and particularly  the   creation  of   a   Norwegian  ministry  of   Foreign Affairs  and  Norwegian  consuls.  The  elections  were  very  animated; the   Radical  Left  gained   18,500   votes.  It   elected  65   deputies, the   Sverdrup   party   14,   and   the   Conservative  party   35.

an  eight-hour  day,   and   legislation  in   the   interest  of   workingmen.

Trouble  began   at   once  with  the   King   on   the   question  of   Norwegian consuls.  The   Storthing  declared  that   the   creation  of   a consular  body   was  an  exclusively  Norwegian  affair,  to   be   settled by   Norwegian  legislation.  The  King   replied  that  the   right   of settling  the   question  belonged  to   him  according  to  the  laws established  on  the   union  of   the   two  countries  (March,  1892). The  Storthing  determined  to   create  consuls ; the   King   refused  his sanction;  the   ministers  offered  to  resign,  but  the   King   was obliged  to   keep   them  (1892).  As   at   the   time   of   the   previous  conflict, they   were  met   by   a   question   of   procedure;  the   Storthing claimed  the   right   of   final  decision,  as   the   representative  of   the sovereign  people  of   Norway,  while  the  King   affirmed  that  a change  in   the   relations  established  by   the   union  could  be   made only   by   agreement  between  the   two  governments.  In   Sweden the   Diet   (April,   1893),   in   Norway   the   Right,   supported  the   King. The  King   once  more  took  a   conservative  ministry  (Stang,   April, 1893)   and   kept   it   in   spite   of   the   Storthing's  vote  of   want  of   confidence. The   Storthing  retorted  by   refusing  to   vote  funds  for foreign  affairs,  the  civil  list,   and  the   ministers  (1893),  and determined  upon  a  separate  consulate  for   Norway.  The  Left

won  the  majority  in   the   elections  of   1894   and   the   contest  has remained  open.  The  Storthing  has  continued  to   vote  measures in   opposition  to   the   King's   ministers - separation  of   consulates, and  later  (1896)   a   Norwegian  flag   with  no  symbol   of   the   union. The  King   has   continued  to   refuse  his   sanction  to   the   decisions  of the   Storthing  (1894)   and   has   retained  his   conservative  ministry, even  after  it   has   indicated  a   wish   to   resign   (1895).

The  conflict  has   provoked  a  counter  movement  in   Sweden, and  has   taken  the   form  of   a   conflict  between  the   two  peoples, Norwegians  and  Swedes.  In   both  countries,  the   Chambers  'have manifested  a   mutual  lack   of   confidence  by   voting   special   military appropriations  (1895).  The  Swedish  government  has  proposed a   revision  of   the   union  compact;  but   the   Storthing  insisted  that the   negotiations  should  be   carried  on   by   a   ministry  which  was in   harmony  with  the   Norwegian  majority;  the   King   has   formed a   routine  ministry,  and   the   conflict  goes  on.

## DENMARK    AND    THE    DUCHIES.

The  Danish  Monarchy  before  the   Separation  of   the   Duchies.After  the   cession  of   Norway,  the   Danish  monarchy  was  reduced to  the  Kingdom  of   Denmark  (comprising  Jutland  and  the islands),  Iceland,  and   the   duchies  of   Schleswig,  Holstein,  and Lauenburg.

The   population  was  chiefly   agricultural,  but   there  remained  an extensive  nobility  which  controlled  the   court  and   filled  the   offices. The   peasants,who  until  1788   had   been  dependent  on   the   nobles  to an  extent  bordering  on  serfdom,  had   not  yet   any   political  activity. Copenhagen,  the   only   city   of   any   importance,  was  the   centre  of court  life.  The  King   preserved  the   tradition  of   the   "   enlightened despotism  "   of   the   eighteenth  century :   religious  toleration, patriarchal  administration,  absolute,  secret,  and  uncontrolled government.

Frederick  VI.  (1808-39)  confined  himself  to  a  promise  of publishing  the   budget   (1813),   which  was  not  carried  out   before 1835   ; he   also   created  a   set   of   provincial  Estates  after   the   Prussian model,  purely   consultative,  for   consideration  of   laws   and   financial questions  (1831-34).  There  were  four  provinces:  the  Islands, Jutland,  Schleswig,  and   Holstein.  The  only   business  which  was made  public  was  the   regulation  of   the   heavy   financial  burdens left   by   the   wars  of   the   French  Empire.  In   1813   the   paper  money had   fallen  to   one-fourth  of   its   value,   and   the   government  had

gone   into  partial   bankruptcy;  the   debt  remained  enormous  and did   not   begin   to   decrease  until   1841.

A   small  liberal  aristocratic  party   had   been  formed  among  the cultivated  classes  in   Copenhagen,  desiring  a  constitution  and hoping  to  secure  it   from  the   hereditary  prince.  But   Christian VIII.  (1839-48),  who  was  now  King,  became  an  absolutist. He  was  besides  absorbed  by   the   struggle  against  his   German subjects  in   Holstein,  and   died  before  getting   beyond   the   plan   of a   constitution  (January,  1848).

The  whole  reign   of   Frederick  VII.  (1848-63)  was   filled  with   the intrigues,  negotiations,  and   wars  of   the   Schleswig-Holstein  affair, and  during  all   that   time  Danish  politics   were  controlled  or   disturbed by   the   quarrels  with  the   duchies.

The  Liberals  were  meanwhile  the   Danish  national  party,   desiring union  with   the   duchies,  or  at   least   with   Schleswig,  with   a single  constitution  for   the   whole  monarchy.  Frederick  VII. leaned  on  this   party   and   formed  a   Liberal  ministry  (March,  1848), which  repealed  the   laws  against  the   liberty   of   the   press.   He then  granted  a   constitution,  the   fundamental  law   of   June,   1849, which  established  an  annual  Diet  composed  of   two  Chambers, elected  by   the   owners  of   property;  it   also   guaranteed  liberty   of the   press,  of   religion,   and   of   public   meeting.

This  constitution,  confined  to   the   Kingdom  of   Denmark,  was short-lived.  The  King   then  proposed  a  constitution  for  the whole  monarchy,  including  the   duchies;  but   this   project,  drawn up   at   the   time   of   the   general   reaction  against   the   representative system,  lessened  the   power  of   the   Diet.  The   Diet  protested ;   the government  replied  with  press  prosecutions,  and  the   King,   by virtue  of   his   own  authority,  promulgated  the   Constitution  of   July, 1854.  This  reduced  the  Diet  to  a  single   consulting  assembly having  no  authoritative  vote  except   in   imposing  new  taxes.     The Diet  voted  to   impeach  the   ministry.     It   was   dissolved,  but   reelected  (1854),   and   the   King   changed  his   ministry.     The   conflict ended  in   a   compromise;  this   was  the   Constitution  of   October  2, 1855,   which  reserved  to   the   Diet   all   its   powers  and   established  a common  Council  of   State  for   the   whole  monarchy,  in   which  the Kingdom  of   Denmark  had  47   representatives  (35   elected,  12  appointed by   the   King),   and   the   duchies  33   (8   appointed  by   the King).      This  constitution,  declared  void  by   the   provincial  estates of   the   duchies,  remained  in   a   precarious  condition.

The  Duchies  of   Schleswig-Holstein. - The  King   of   Denmark was  sovereign  of   the   two   duchies  of   Schleswig  and   Holstein,  and

also   of   the   duchy   of   Lauenburg  (received  in   1815   as   indemnity for   the   loss   of   Pomerania).  These  duchies  were  distinct  from the   Kindom  of   Denmark  and  belonged  to  the   King   as   Duke. They   had   had   each  its   own   history,   its   distinct  administration  and Assembly  of   Estates,  though  united  under  the   same  sovereign, and  declared  indissolubly  united.  In   1815,   however,  when  the German  Confederation  was  formed,  Holstein  and  Lauenburg alone  were  included  in   it   and   Schleswig  had   remained  outside. The  population  of   Holstein,  Lauenburg,  and   southern  Schleswig was  German,  that  of   Northern  Schleswig  was  Danish.  Thus,  by a   contradictory  combination  of   terms,  the   duchies  and   Denmark made  part   of   the   same  monarchy  without  forming  one  nation; Holstein,  although  subject  to  the   Danish  government,  was  a member  of   a   foreign   confederation  in   which  Schleswig  was  not included,  although  indissolubly  united  to   Holstein ;   and   the   limits of   the   Danish  nationality  did   not   coincide  with   the   limits  of   either province.  These  contradictions  made  a  rational  solution  impossible.

The  "   question  of   the   duchies  "   was,   however,  long   in   coming into   prominence,  for   national  feeling   was  not  yet   aroused.  The Germans  in   Holstein  were  used  to   regarding  Denmark  as   their country;  they   even  sang   the   Danish  national  songs.

The  agitation  began   against  Frederick,  who  governed  as  an absolute  sovereign,  without  consideration  for   the   historic  privileges of   the   knights   of   Holstein;  Dahlmann,  the   historian,  a   professor at   Kiel,   presented  their  claims  in   the   name  of   historic rights.  In   1830   a  more  radical  agitator,  Uwe  Lornsen,  demanded a   single   constitution  for   the   two   duchies  and   separation from  Denmark.  "   We  have  nothing  in  common  with  the Danes,"  he   said,   "   but   the   King   and  the   enemy."  He  was arrested,  and   the   King   created  two  assemblies  of   estates,  one   for Schleswig,  the   other  for   Holstein.  But   the   Germans  in   Holstein were  beginning  to  object  to   being   Danish;  the  University  of Kiel   became  a   centre  of   Germanic  propagandism.

Conflict  then  began   between  the   German  patriots  who  wanted a   separate  administration  for   the   duchies  and   the   Danish  patriots who  wanted  to  maintain  the  united  monarchy.  Between  the two  extreme  parties  came  two  intermediate  parties:  a   German party   in   Holstein  which  renounced  Schleswig,  and  a   Danish party  which  renounced  Holstein.  But  soon  all   the  Germans united  to   sustain  the   indissolubility  of   the   duchies.

After  the   death  of   Frederick  VI.   (1839)   there  remained  but   two

princes,   neither  of   whom  had   an   heir ; these  were  the   later   Kings Christian  VIII.  and  Frederick  VII.  The  question  of   the   succession had   to   be   decided.  Now  the   right   of   succession  was  not the  same  all   over  the   monarchy:  in   Denmark  the  succession could  be   inherited  by   women,  in   Holstein  by   men  only;   in   the case  of   Schleswig  and   Lauenburg  the   point   was   in   dispute.  The Danish  government,  however,  meant  to  preserve  the   monarchy intact,   including  Holstein,  and   the   German  party   wished  to   cut off   from  it   both   Holstein  and   Schleswig  as   inseparable.

The  two  parties   officially  declared  their  pretensions.  The   Estates of   Holstein,  in   the   petition   of   1844,   maintained  three  points : the   duchies  are   (i)   independent,  (2)   united  forever,  (3)   hereditary in   the   male   line.  The   King   replied   that   Schleswig  followed  the female  line   like   Denmark,  that   for   Holstein  the   question  was   in doubt,  but   that   he   would  be   forced  to   assure  the   maintenance  of the   Danish  monarchy  (1846).  The  German  party  made  rejoinder in   the   form  of   mass-meetings,  a   protest   from  the   Estates  of Holstein  to   the   king,   who   refused  to   receive  it,   and   a   complaint to   the   German  Diet.  Then  appeared  the   patriotic  song  of   the duchies,  Schleswig-Holstein  meerumschlungen.

The  Wars  of   the   Duchies. - The  revolution  of   1848   excited  the national  parties  and   pushed  the   conflict  at   length   to   the   point of   war.  The  Danish  liberal  nationalist  party,  which  the   King called  to   the   ministry,  had   adopted   a   mixed  solution:  to   renounce Holstein,  the   German  country,  which  belonged  to   the   Confederation, to   keep   the   country  north  of   the   Eider,   »that   is,   Schleswig, and   to   make  it   one  nation  with   Denmark  ; this   is   what   was  called the   party   of   the   "   Eider  Danes."  This  solution  implied  the   rupture of   the   union  between  Schleswig  and  Holstein,  a  common constitution  for   Schleswig  and   Denmark,  and   for   the   future  succession through   the   female  line   for   Schleswig.  The   German party   in   the   duchies,  in   the   name  of   the   indissoluble  union,   demanded the   admission  of   Schleswig  into   the   Confederation  and a   common  constitution  for   the   duchies;  on  the   refusal  of   the King  the  party  rose  in   rebellion  and   established  a   provisional government,  which  declared  itself  in   favour  of   indissoluble  unity, male  succession,  and  the   entrance  of   Schleswig  into  the   Confederation.

From    this     moment   three   questions    awaited    decision:    I. Should  Schleswig  remain  united  to   Holstein  and   join   the   Confederation, or  remain  outside  of   the   Confederation  and   joined   to Denmark?     2.   Should    the     constitution    be     common    to    the

duchies  or   to   Schleswig  and   Denmark?    3.   Should  the   succession be   male  or   female?

The  War  began   in   August,  1848,   and   lasted  until  1850,   broken by   truces  into   three  wars.  The  German  party   had   its   centre  at Kiel  and  carried  on   its   work  through  the   aid   of   volunteers  or regular  troops   from  Germany.  The  Danish  party  carried  on   its work  through  the  Danish  army  and  the  aid  of   European diplomacy.

1.   In   the   first   war  the   Danish  army   drove  back  behind  the Eider  the  Germans  of   Schleswig-Holstein  and  German  volunteers; the   Prussian  troops   forced  the   Danish  army   to   evacuate the   duchies.    The  European  powers  imposed  a   truce  (August, 1848)   which  established  in   the   duchies  a   provisional  government, half   Prussian  and   half   Danish.     The  Frankfort  Parliament  rejected the   truce  by   238   votes  against   221,   then   accepted  it   by   258 against  238.      No   definite  arrangement  could  be   made,  as  the Danes  wished  Schleswig  to   be   inseparable  from  the   monarchy, and  the   Germans  refused.

2.   The   truce  over,  the   German  army  of   Holstein  invaded  Jutland, but   was  surprised  and   put   to   rout.    A   new  truce;  then Schleswig,  evacuated  by   the   Holstein  army,  was  occupied  by   the Prussian  troops  and  governed  by   two  officers,  a   Dane  and  a Prussian  (April-July,  1849).

3.   After  the   failure  of   the   German  revolution   the   European powers  (England,  France,  and  Russia)  decided  at   the  London Conference  to   uphold  the   integrity  of   the   Danish  monarchy  as necessary  to   the   balance  of   power   in   Europe.     The   isolated  King of   Prussia  withdrew  his   troops.     The   Holstein  army,  abandoned by   the   German  states,  was  crushed  by   the   Danish  army   in   July, 1850.

The   King   of   Denmark  resumed  possession  of   the   duchies.  He declared  their  union  dissolved  by   a   decree  (January,  1852). He  imposed  on  them  a  common  constitution  with  Denmark. The  succession  was  regulated  by   the   powers  under  the   form  of   a protocol  adopted  in   London  (May,   1852):   the   Prince  of   Gliicksburg,   husband  of   the   King's   niece,   was   declared  heir   of   the   whole monarchy,  including  the  duchies.  The  intervention  of   the powers  had   decided  the   questions  as   Denmark  wished.  But  the solution  was  not  accepted  by   the   Estates  of   Schleswig  and   Holstein, nor   by   the   Germanic  confederation,  nor  the   male  heirs  of the   duchies  (the   consent  of   the   nearest  heir   had   been  secured  but not  that   of   his   successor).  The   Estates  of   Schleswig  and   Hoi-

stein   refused  to   recognise  the   female  line   of   succession,  protested against  the   Constitution  of   1855,   and   refused  to   elect   deputies   to the   Council  of   State,   where  the   majority  was   Danish.

The  Danish  government,  treating  its   adversaries  as  rebels,   dismissed all   officials,  pastors,  and   teachers  belonging  to   the   German party  - also   even  the   professors  in   the   University  of   Kiel. In   some  parts   of   Schleswig  it   forbade  the   use  of   German  in   the schools.  In   Germany  the   Danish  domination  over  the   German population  of   the   duchies  became  one  of   the   grievances  of   the national  party. man

Even  in   Denmark  the   national  party   disapproved  the   King's policy.  It   insisted  upon  retaining  Schleswig,  in   spite   of   the   Germans' demands,  in   the   hope   of   annexing  it   to   Denmark;  it   did not,   however,  want  to   keep   Holstein,  whose  German  population, by   its   systematic  opposition,  would  prevent  the   establishment  of a   truly   national  constitution.  This  party   finally   won  over  the King.  A   patriotic  society,  the   Denmark  Union,  was   founded  in 1861,   "   to   resist   all   attempts  at   foreign   intervention  in   the   home affairs  of   Denmark,  to   maintain  the   Danish  nationality  in   Schleswig and   introduce  into   that   country  that   liberty   which  was  promised by   the   Constitution  of   1849."  The  King   promulgated  a regulation  which  established  a  special  system  for  Holstein (March,  1862).  The  German  majority  in   the   Schleswig  Estates protested,  and  then  resigned  their  seats;  the   German  Diet  at Frankfort  voted  to   enforce  the   execution  of   its   decisions  of   1858, 1860,   1861,   and   1863.   The  Danish  government  replied   by   presenting a  common  constitution.

The  Separation  of   the   Duchies. - In   the   midst  of   the   conflict, King   Frederick  VII.  died  suddenly,  and   the   question  of   succession had   to   be   settled.  The   heir   to   the   Danish  throne,   Christian IX.   of   Glucksburg,  backed  by   the   London  protocol,  had   himself proclaimed  as   King   in   both   Denmark  and   the   duchies.  He   hesitated at   accepting   the   new  constitution  common  to   Denmark and  Schleswig,  as  contrary  to  the   London  protocol;  but  the people  of   Copenhagen,  when  the   patriotic  party  resigned,  came en   masse  to   the   palace,   and   Christian  signed   the   Constitution  of 1863.  In   the   duchies,  on  the   contrary,  the   Estates  recognised  as their  sovereign  the   heir   in   the   male1   line,   Frederick  of   Augustenburg.  Three  questions  came  up   at  once:  the   union  of   Schleswig, the   common  constitution,  and   the   succession.

The  solution  came  not  from  the   Danes  or   the   inhabitants  of the   duchies,  but   from  foreign  powers.  The  Germans  in   the

duchies  pinned  their  hopes  on  the  German  Diet,  which  had already  decided  to   send  a   federal  army;  the   Danes  were  counting on   the   states  of   Europe   that   in   1852   had   guaranteed  the   territory of   the   Danish  monarchy.  But   both  parties   were  deceived.  The two  great   German  states,  Austria  and  Prussia,  declaring  themselves bound   by   the   London  protocol,  began   by   recognising Christian.  Frederick  was  supported  only   by   the   small  states  of Germany  (see   p.   468).   Prussia  and   Austria  accepted  the   succession, but   not   the   Constitution  of   1863;   thev   sent  to   Denmark  a demand  that  it   should  be   abrogated;  on   the   King's   refusal  they sent  their  troops   into   Schleswig  (February,  1864).  The  Danish government  awaited  the  intervention  of   the  European  states. The  Queen  of   England,  however,  did   not  want  war,  and  Napoleon spoke   of   having   the   question   settled  by   a   vote  of   the   in- habitants of   the   duchies,  according  to   the   principle  of   nationality. The  Danish  army   (35,000  men)   had  received  the   order  to   risk no   decisive  action;  its   part   was  to   give   European  intervention time  to  make  its   appearance.  It   evacuated  Schleswig  almost without  resistance  and  withdrew  behind  the  entrenchments  of Dtippel,  which  covered  Jutland;  there  it   held  out   for   six   weeks. The  position  was  taken  by   storm  on   April   18.  On   April   25 the  conference  between  the  European  powers  was  reopened. England  proposed  to   divide  Schleswig;  Napoleon,  directly  consulted by   Denmark,  accepted  the   plan,   but   proposed  to   divide  the duchy  according  to   language.  Prussia  and  Austria  demanded the   complete  cession  of   the   two   duchies,  which  should  form  a single   state.  The  conference  was  interrupted  (June   25).   The armies  of   Austria  and   Prussia  took  possession  of   the   whole  of Jutland  and  threatened  the   islands.  Denmark,  abandoned  by Europe,  resigned  herself  to  signing  a  peace  ceding  the   three duchies  to   Austria  and   Prussia  (August,  1864).

Austria  and   Prussia  held   to   their  conquest.  In   1866  Austria, after   her   defeat,   gave  up   her   rights   over  the   duchies,  and   Prussia annexed  them.  One  article  of   the  treaty  promised  that  the "   people   of   northern  Schleswig,  if   by   a   free   vote  they   should signify   their   desire  to   be   united  to   Denmark,  should  be   ceded  to Denmark."  But  Prussia  never  consulted  the  people,  and  in 1878   Austria  agreed   to   cancel  that   clause.  The   Danish  party   in Schleswig  remained  under  Prussian  rule;  the  inhabitants  have never  ceased  to   show  their  discontent  by   electing  always   a   protester as   their  deputy.  The  Prussian  government  has  retorted by   persecuting  Danish  patriots  and  forbidding  the   use  of   the

Danish  language.  In   1885   sixteen  young  girls   were  fined  for singing  Danish  patriotic  songs;  a   bookseller  was   fined  for   having offered  for   sale   a   book   whose  covers  bore   the   Danish  colors.

The   Constitution  of   1866. - After  the   separation  of   the   duchies Danish  politics  were  transformed.  A   new  democratic  party,  the Friends  of   the   Peasants,  demanded  the   abrogation  of   the   existing constitution  and   the   restoration  of   the   Constitution  of   1849.

The  government  presented  a  plan   to  re-establish  the   system of   1849,   but   with   an   important  change.  Of   the   two   Chambers sf   the   Diet,   one,   the   Folkething,  was  still   to   be   a   really   repre&gt;ensative  body,   elected  under  a   very  extended  suffrage;  but   the upper   Chamber,  the   Landthing,  was  to   be   composed  of   66   members, 12   appointed   by   the   king,   the   others  elected  by   voters  possessing an   income  of   2000  crowns.  The  lower  house  rejected this  plan   as  anti-democratic;  it   was  dissolved,  but  re-elected (1865);  and  after  a   long   conflict  the   government  plan   became the   Constitution  of   1866,   which  rules  Denmark  to-day.

For  the   first   few   years   the   ministry  governed  almost  without opposition;  it   was  absorbed  in   the   reorganization  of   the   army, navy,  and   military  service.  But   a   great   transformation  was  preparing to   take  place   in   public   opinion.  The  "   Liberal  v   party, which  had   held   the   ministry  during   the   struggle  over  the   duchies, was  before  everything  a   belligerent  patriotic  party;   its   program had   consisted  chiefly   in   the   defence  of   Schleswig.  After  the   loss of   Schleswig  it   became  a   conservative  party,   composed  of   officials and   landowners,  the   party   of   the   court  and   middle  class;   its   force lay   in   the   capital   (Copenhagen)  and  its   neighbourhood.  The rest  of   the   country  quickly  joined   the   opposition.  It   divided into   two  groups  :   the   Moderate  Left,   composed  chiefly   of   deputies from  the   north  of   the   islands  and   of   Jutland;  the   Democratic Left  (Peasants'  Friends),  recruited  principally  from  the   south  of the   islands  and   southern  Jutland.

As  in   Norway,  the   subject  of   dispute  was  the   budget;  the Right  supported  the  King  and  the  ministry,  who  demanded money  for   officials  and   war  expenses;  the   Left   wished  to   reduce expenditure  and  taxes.  As   in   Norway,  the   peasants  formed  the Democratic  party,  while  the   capital   elected  the   Conservatives.

At  each  election  the   opposition  gained  seats  in   the   Lower House.  In   1870   the   groups  of   the   Left   joined   forces  and   defeated the   budget,   whereupon  the   ministry  resigned.  The   following ministries  secured  their   budgets   by   only   a   few   votes  majority. In   1873   the   Left  coalition  had   49   members,  the   Right jority.

(national-liberal)  only   15;   in   addition  to   these  was  the   Third party   (15   members)  and  the   "   transitional  group   "   (9   members). The  coalition  demanded  an  extended  suffrage  and   choice  of   pastors by   the   faithful;  it   rejected   the   budget   and   passed   a   vote  of want  of   confidence  in   the   ministry  by   55   votes  against   34.   The Chamber  was  dissolved,  but   the   Left  was  re-elected.

The  Constitutional  Conflict  (1873-94).- The  conflict  over  voting the   budget   led   to   a   constitutional  conflict.  The   declaration of   the   Lower  House  in   1873   placed   the   question  thus :   "   It   is a   necessary  condition  of   constitutional  monarchy  that  the   government should   be   in   harmony   with   the   house  which  is   elected by   universal  suffrage."  The  King   must  choose  a   "   ministry  in harmony  with  the   people's  representatives."  This  was  the   theory of   the   parliamentary  system  in   practice  in   England,  Belgium, and  France.  The  King   replied  that  the  Chamber  misunderstood the   conditions  of   the   constitution  (1873);   he   considered himself  entitled  to   keep   a   ministry  which  one  of   the   Chambers supported;  he   declared  (1883)   that   "understanding  was  possible only   through  negotiation  between  the   two   Chambers."  This  was the   theory   of   harmony  between  the   three  powers  and  equality between  the  two  Chambers,  which  Bismarck  had  imposed  on Prussia.

The  conflict  was   interrupted  by   a   compromise  ministry  (1874), but   went  on  under  the   "   fighting   ministry  "   (Estrup)  formed  in 1875.  The  Left&gt;  in   sPite   °f   dissolutions  (1876;   1878;   May,   1881; July,   1881),   retained  its   large   majority  in   the   Folkething;  after the   dissolution  of   1876   it   controlled  three-fourths  of   the   votes. The  ministry,  however,  refused  to   retire,   and   the   Chamber  could not  get   rid   of   it   by   impeachment  because  the   Landthing,  which would  have  sat   in   judgment  on  the   trial,   had   been,   since  the promulgation  of   the   Constitution  of   1866,   controlled  by   the court.

The  Folkething  began  to  refuse  the   budget,  not  simply  as presented  by   a  ministry  which  did   not  possess  the   confidence of   the   country,   but   because  the   ministry,  following  the   belligerent traditions  of   the   national-liberal  party,   demanded  great   sums  for the   navy  and   for   fortifying  Copenhagen.  The  Democratic  party held  that   Denmark,  not   being   threatened  by   Germany,  had   no need  of   costly   armament.  The  Landthing,  of   course,  supported the   ministry.  Each  year   the   Folkething  rejected  the   budget, each  year   the   Landthing  voted  it,   and   the   ministry  acted  on   it by   means  of   a   provisional  financial  law.  This  expedient,  em-

ployed  since  1877,   was  based  on   Article  25   of   the   constitution: "   The   King   may,   in   case  of   urgency,  when  the   Diet  is   not  assembled, decree   provisional  laws.  .   .   These  laws   must  always be   brought   before  the   Diet  at   its   next  session."  This   interpretation, similar  to   that   made  by   Charles  X.   in   the   French  Charte, did   not  rid   the   ministry  of   the   obligation  to   secure  the   approval of   its   provisional  budget   for   the   following  year.   The   Left  did not  agree  on   its   policy.  The   moderate  group,  to   avoid  rupture with  the   ministry,  consented  to   vote  a   compromise  budget,  omitting the   expenditure  for   fortifying  Copenhagen  (1882),   and   let the   provisional  financial  law   become  a  custom.

The  Democratic  Left  (Berg),   which  opposed  every   form  of   conciliation, finally   won   the   majority   in   the   Folkething   in   1884.   For the   first   time   part   of   Copenhagen  escaped  the   Conservatives,  the socialists  gaining  three  members  there  (out   of   9).   The  contest then  became  sharp.   The   Folkething  declared  that  "   any   discussion of   reform  with  the   present  ministry  was  a   waste  of   time,"   and refused  to   examine  any   projects.  This  meant  open  war  between the   Democratic  nation  as  represented  by   its   elective  Chamber, and  the   King,   as  master  of   the   ministry  and   supported  by   the aristocracy - a  similar  contest  to   that  in   Prussia  from  1862  to 1866.

As   in   Prussia,  the   ministry,   which  in   its   executive  function  was the   controlling  force,   had   the   power  to   govern  outside  of   legal formalities,  in   the   name  of   the   interest  of   the   state.  Not   only did   it   continue  to   spend   money  on  objects   authorized  by   the   old budget  without  the   consent  of   the   Lower  House,  but   it   also   introduced new   items   of   expenditure  for   army  expenses,  carried  them through  the   Upper  House,  and  added  them  to   the   provisional budget.  Henceforth  there  was  no   longer   a   legal   budget   in   Denmark. In   order  to   put   a   stop   to   tfre   demonstrations  of   discontent, the   ministry   had   the   Landthing  pass   other  provisional  laws, increasing  the   number  of   police   and   gendarmerie,  and   limiting liberty   of   the   press  and   of   public   meeting   (1885);   it   secured  the imprisonment  of   the   head  of   the   Democratic  party,   Berg,   who was  accused  of   having   "   encouraged  rebellion  "   in   a   public   meeting. Denmark  lived  under  a  regime   of   special   measures,  as   if under  martial  law.

The  ministry,  armed  with  force  against   a   disarmed  nation,  succeeded finally   in   discouraging  resistance.  The  Democratic party,  worried  by   personal  rivalries,  broke  up.   In   1884   the "   Danish  Left,"   under  Berg,   the   former  peasant  party,  separated

from  the  "   literary  Left  "   under  a  group  of   writers  (Horup, Brandes),  which  was  analogous  to   the   "   European  Left   "   in   Norway, a   primarily  urban  party,   demanding  universal  suffrage  and social  reforms.  The  literary  Left  worked  in   harmony  with  the socialist  party,  organized  in   1878   as  the   workingmen's  party, but   later   recruited  in   the   country   districts  also,   especially  in   Jutland.

In   1888  the   Left,   cut   into   four  sections,  disputed  over  its policy.  Berg   wanted  to   continue  the   policy   of   obstruction.  A congress  of   the   opposition  parties   determined  to   negotiate  with the   ministry,  and   secured  an  amnesty  and   the   abolition  of   the special  laws  of   1885.   Finally,  Berg   being   dead  (1891)   and Horup  not  being   re-elected,  the   Democratic  party   lost   the   majority. In   the   Folkething  of   1892   it   had   only   29   members  against 38   of   the   moderate  Left  and   32   of   the   ministerial  party.   The moderate  Left  voted  the  budget  and  the  military  laws  (1894); then  only   did   Estrup   retire,   with  the   thanks  of   the   King.   The conflict  ended  in   victory   for   the   King   and   his   ministers.*

Like  the   Norwegians,  the   Danes,  in   the   midst  of   political  conflict, have   produced  their   most  brilliant  generation  of   writers, a   number  of   novelists  of   European  reputation ; they   have  attained an  unprecedented  degree  of   prosperity.  The  population,  which had  at   least  doubled  between  1800  and  1870,   has   continued  to increase  (from   1,794,000  in   1870   to   2,185,000  in   1890).  The merchant  marine,  between  1870   and  1890,   increased  by   700   ships and   85,000   tons.  The   national  debt,   increased  to   380,000,000  in 1866,   was  reduced  in   1891   to   250,000,000,  and   the   budget   has almost  always  shown  a  surplus.

Iceland. - While  the   Danish  conflict  was  in   progress,  the   government engaged   in   conflict  with   Iceland.  In   1874   the   island, hitherto  governed  by   a   sort  of   patriarchal  sytem,  received  a   constitution. A   Chamber  (Althing)  of   36   members,  6   appointed  by the   King,   30   elected  by   universal  suffrage,  had   the   legislative power;  the   executive  power  was  vested  in   a  resident  governor, and   a   minister  for   Iceland  in   Denmark.  The  opposition,  which was   in   majority  in   the   Althing,   demanded  a   ministry  for   Iceland independent  of   Danish  policy,   also  financial  independence.

The  Constitution  of   1893   finally   established  home  rule  in   Iceland. The   island   no   longer   contributes  to   the   treasury  of   the

*   In   the   elections  of   1895   the   Left   regained  the   majority  (54   against   24   of the   Right   and   27   of   the   Third  party).  The  socialist  members  increased from  2   to   8.

monarchy;  the   Secretary  for   Iceland  resides  at   Copenhagen  and is   responsible  for   the   maintenance  of   the   constitution.  The Althing  is   composed  of   two  Chambers:  the   Upper  Chamber  of 6   members,  appointed  by   the   King,   and   6   elected  by   the   Lower House ; it   has   the   right   to   complain   of   the   governor,  but   the   King reserves  the   right   to   decide  such  cases.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.*

BIBLIOGRAPHY.- For  periodical  bibliographies  of  Scandinavian countries,  see  Ch.-V.  Langlois,  "Manuel  de   Bibl.  Hist,"  p.   157.- The  bibl. of   the   history   of   institutions  is   given   in   the   monographs  of   the   Marquardsen  collection.

DOCUMENTS.- The  official  documents  are  indicated  in   the  bibl.  of the   Marquardsen  coll.  (the   texts  of   the   constitutions  are   in   Dareste,  "   Les Constitutions  ").   The  reproduction  and  analysis  of   chief  of   these,  as  well as   the   story   of   events,  may   be   found  in   the   three  annuals  :   "   Annuaire des   DeuxMondes"  up   to  1870,  Schulthess,  "   Europ.  Geschichtskalender  " since  1860  (in   which  the  Scandinavian  countries  receive  inadequate attention),  and   the   "   Annual  Register"  in   particular,  the   best  of   the   three for   the   Scandinavian  countries.

WORKS.- COMPLETE  HISTORIES:  Allen,  "   Hist,  of   Denmark"  (Fr.tr.), 1878,  stops  at   1866. - Thorsae,  "Den  Danske  Statspolitiske  Historic,"  2 vols.,  1872-78,  goes   from  1800  to  1848.- H.   Weitmeyer,  "   Le   Danemark, Hist,  et   Geogr, ,"   1889,   popular   synopsis. -  Boyesen,  "   The   Hist,  of   Norway," 1886;   a   good   brief  account.- Save,   "   Sveriges  Historia  under  den  Nyaste Tiden,"  1890,  a   popular  work.

ON  THE  DUCHIES  OF  SCHLESWIG-HOLSTEIN  :   See  Waitz,  "   Quellenkunde der  Deutschen  Gesch.,"  1894   edit.;  Nos.  6174   to   6203   and  6272   to   6286; bibl.  of   works  in   every   language.

Information  concerning  political  life   in   the   Scandinavian  countries  may be   found  in   the   German  and  English  reviews  (see   bibl.  of   chap,   ii-iv.,   and xv-xvi.).

HISTORY  OF  INSTITUTIONS  :   Aschehoug,  "   Staatsrecht  d.   K.   SchwedenNorwegen,"  1886.- Goos  and  Hansen,  "   Staatsrecht  Danemarks,"  1889,   both in   the   Marquardsen  coll. - Berencreutz,  "   Droit  Constitutional  du   Royaume de   Suede,"  1886,   Stockholm.

*   Being   unacquainted  with  the  Scandinavian  languages,  I   have  been able  to   prepare  only   a   brief  bibliography,  which  gives   no   idea  of   the   activity of   literary  production  in   the   Scandinavian  countries.

## CHAPTER   XIX.

THE   RUSSIAN   EMPIRE  AND   POLAND.

The   Kussian  Empire  in   1814. - The  Tsar's  Empire  in   Europe had  its   territory  complete  as  early   as  1814.  It   was,  without counting  his  Asiatic  possessions,  by   far  the  largest  of   the European  states;  the   total  population  in   1815   was  estimated  at 45,000,000.  It   was  composed  of   several  groups  of   peoples   united by   a   series   of   conquests  under  the   same  rule,   who   preserved  their own  particular  dress,  language,  and  religion,  and  lived  side   by side   without  blending.  As   the   Russian  government's  struggle against  these  nationalities  is   one  of   the   leading   facts  in   the   history of   Russia  during  the   nineteenth  century,*  it   is   necessary  tc give   an  exact  representation  of   the   incongruous  bits   which  combined to   make   the   Russian  Empire:

1.   Greater  Russia,  the   original  centre  and   the   most  important part   of   the   Empire,   had   a   Russian  population  speaking  the   Russian language  (Greater-Russian  dialect)  and  belonging  to  the Orthodox  Greek  Church.     The  Dissenters  (Old   Believers),  who had   been  separated  from  the   official  Church  since  the   reform  of the   liturgy   in   the   seventeenth  century,  formed  numerous  sects, though  forbidden  by   law.

2.   Lesser  Russia  (Kiev,   Ukraine),  a   Russian  district  partially subject  to   Poland,  and   later  reconquered,  had   also   a   population speaking  the   Russian  language  and  belonging  to   the   Orthodox Church.     But  the   Lesser-Russian  dialect  is   sufficiently  different

*   It   would  be   difficult,  in   a   political   history,   to   give   the   Russian  Empire the   space   due   to   its   importance.  This  empire,  by   means  of   its   autocratic constitution,  has  escaped  the  public  agitations  which  constitute  modern political  life.  Except  for   the   liberal  period   under  Alexander  II.,   its   political history   is   particularly  that   of   the   court  and   the   government,  as   in   the   absolute monarchies  of   the   eighteenth  century;  and   this   history   is   in   great   part kept   secret  from  us:   it   is   almost  unknown  except  through  the  accounts given   by   opponents  of   the   government,  which  are  published  abroad  and are  beyond  government  control,  or  through  official  acts  and  articles  in official  publications.  The  internal  history  of   Russia  has   in   any  case  less place   in   this  chapter  than  the  struggles  of   the   government  against  its Polish,  socialist,  and  dissenting  opponents.

578

from  literary   Russian  to   have  a   distinct  popular  literature,  and the   Orthodox  religion  was  not  the   only   one  in   practice;  for, without  speaking  of   the   Protestant  German  colonies,  a   population of   Polish  Jews   had   settled  in   the   cities  and   even  in   the   villages, and   a   number  of   Orthodox  believers  had   joined   the   Catholic Church  under  the   form  of   United  Greeks,  preserving  their married  clergy   and   Slavic  liturgy.

3.   The   country  to   the   east  of   the   Volga,   formerly  a   group  of Tartar  monarchies,  was  inhabited  by   a  mixture  of   Russians  and the   yellow   races   from   Asia,   mainly   Orthodox,  but   partly   Mussulmans.

4.   Southern  Russia,  composed  of   territory  taken  from  the Ottoman  Empire,  was  peopled  by   Russian  colonists,  the   Cossacks, and   tribes   of   Asiatic  origin,   interspersed  with  German  colonies which   had   settled  with  the   promise  of   preserving  their nationality.     Bessarabia,  which  had   been  detached  from  Moldavia in   1812,   had   a   Roumanian  Orthodox  population  mixed  with Polish  Jews.      This   southern  region   had   no  unity   either  of   race, tongue,  or  religion.

5.   Caucasia,  which  Alexander  I.   had  begun   to   annex,  was  a conglomeration  of   little  peoples,  some  Christian  (Armenians), others  Mussulmans  (Circassians),  but   all   warlike,  whose  subjection was   not   completed  until  1864,   and   who   have   preserved  their separate  national   life  - the   only    exception   being   that   certain princely  families,  particularly  in   Georgia,  have  mingled  with  the Russian  aristocracy.     This  district  was  and  still  is   the   military frontier  of   the   Empire,   occupied  by   armies  and   military  colonists, under  a   military  government.

6.   Western  Russia,  the   old   Grand  Duchy   of   Lithuania,  which Catherine  II.   had   annexed,  was  composed  of   old   Russian  countries  (White   Russia),   with   an    Orthodox   Russian   population, formerly   subdued   by    the    Lithuanians - and   of    a    Lithuanian country  in   which  a  portion  of   the   population  still   preserved  the Lithuanian  dress  and  speech,  while  another  portion,  particularly the   aristocracy,  considered  themselves  a   Polish  people.     White Russia  was  Orthodox,  but  its   nobility  was  Catholic;  Lithuania proper  was   Catholic,  but   with  a   large   proportion  of   Jews.

7.   The   Baltic  provinces  (Esthonia,  Livonia,  Courland)  had   a population  of   two  classes,  one  subject   to   the   other.    The   primitive inhabitants,  Finns  and   Lithuanians,  who  were  still   in   the condition  of   peasants,  formed  a   lower  class  and   preserved  their national  speech.     All   the   upper  classes,  the   nobility,  clergy,   and

townspeople,  were  descendants  of   German  colonists,  spoke   German, and   followed  German  ways  of   living.  The   Tsar,   in   receiving them   as   subjects,   had   promised  to   preserve  their   customs  and privileges.  All   the   inhabitants  were  Lutherans.  The   district  of St.   Petersburg  (formerly  Ingria),  cut  off   from  the   Baltic  provinces, had   lost   its   original   character;  it   was  a   mixture  of   all   the languages  and  all   the   religions  in   the   Empire - the   residence  of the   court  and   the   officials.

Siberia  and   later   Asiatic  Russia  were  more  like   colonies  than provinces.  The  Duchy  of   Finland  and  the   Kingdom  of   Poland, newly   acquired  by   Alexander,  remained  distinct  states,  in   which the   Tsar  was   Grand  Duke  or   King.

The  Russian  Empire  was  thus,   like  the   Austrian  Empire,  a conglomeration  of   peoples ;   a   single   tie   bound  them  together,  subjection to   the   power  of   the   autocratic  Tsar,   their   absolute,  uncontrolled sovereign.  The   political   and   social  system   had   remained what  Peter  the   Great  and   Catherine  had   made  it.   Society  consisted of   two  classes,  one  subject   to   the   other:  the   peasants,  the great   majority  of   whom  were  serfs  of   the   crown  or  of   the   nobility, and  subjected  to   the   knout,  the   poll-tax,  and   military  service; they   paid   the   taxes  to   the   government,  rents  to   the   nobles,  and furnished  the   soldiers  (military  service  was  for   25   years):  the landlord  nobles  (about  100,000  families),  who  were  exempt  from the   knout,  poll-tax,  and   military  service,  were  supported  by   the peasants  and  rilled  the   civil  and  military  offices.  The  middle classes  were  of   almost  no  consequence.  The  secular  or  white clergy,  the   popes,  married,  ignorant,  poor,  excluded  from  high office,   had   almost  no  part   but   to   conduct  the   church  ceremonies; the   regular   or   black   clergy,   the   monks,  who   alone  could  become bishops  and  abbots,  were  strangers  to   society.  The  merchants, although  organized  in   corporations  and  officially  recognised  as a   class,   were  scarcely  above  the   peasants,  and   had   neither  education nor   political   life;   except   for   the   government  residences, the   Russian  cities  were  simply   enormous  villages.

There  were  thus  two  classes  of   society,  one  placed   above  the other:  underneath  were  the  peasants,  merchants,  popes,  and monks,  who  were  still   Eastern,  Orthodox,  strangers  to   any   sort of   culture,  or  political  interest;  above  were  the   nobles  and   the officers  of   the   government,  who   had   become  Westernized,  sceptical, and   disposed   to   adopt   all   the   political   ideas   of   Europe,   as   well as   its   fashions  and   language.  Between  these  two  classes  of   society there   was  no  mutual  interest,  not  even  that   of   language.

The  high   aristocracy  spoke   almost  nothing  but   French;  a  number of   the   offices  were  filled  by   Germans  from  the   Baltic provinces.

The  government  had  this  same  incongruous  character.  At bottom  it   was  still,   like   the   people,   eastern  and   patriarchal - that is,   despotic:  a  single   power,  the   autocratic  Tsar,   the   absolute master,  no  other  government  centre  than  his   residence,  no   law but   his   decrees  (ukases),  no  public   authority  but   his   officials,  no institutions  but   those  he   was  pleased  to   establish.  But   it   had pleased  the   Tsars  to   establish  European  institutions;  and   Russia had  a   European  capital  (St.   Petersburg),  European  diplomacy, an  army  organized  on  the   German  system,  a   European  centralization of   the   government,  with  councils  and   committees,  European courts  with  written  secret  procedure,  European  police,   taxes,  and monopolies  copied  from  Europe,  division  into  gubernies  (governments) and   districts,  assemblies  of   nobles  under  the   presidency of   a   marshal  chosen  from  the   nobles  after  the   German  fashion. Even  the   Orthodox  Church,  the   only   national  institution,  was subject  to   an  ecclesiastical  college,   the   Holy   Synod,   and   to   a   lay officer  copied   from  Europe,  the   High   Proctor  of   the   Holy   Synod, who  proposed  the   appointments  of   the   prelates  and   all   ecclesiastical measures.

This  was  the   "   enlightened  despotism  "   of   the   eighteenth  century, without  any   sort  of   political   liberty   for   subjects.  The   government admitted  neither  liberty   of   the   press  nor  of   public   meeting, neither  deliberative  assemblies  nor  public   demonstrations without  authorization,  neither  control  over  the   actions  of   officials nor  guarantee  against  their  abuse  of   power.  Even  religious  freedom was   limited  by   the   state   Church.  All   previous  creeds  of peoples  annexed  were  protected  by   special  promises  from  the Tsar;   every   Protestant,  Catholic,  Jew,   or   Mussulman  subject   was free   to   practise   his   religion.  But   no   Orthodox  subject  could leave  the   official  Church  ;   conversion  of   an   Orthodox  to   any   other religion  was   forbidden  under  heavy   penalty,  and   Dissenting  sects (raskol)  which  broke  away   from  the   old   Church,  were  pursued like   criminals.  Toleration  was  limited  to   foreign  religions.

This  system  had  never  been  perfectly  applied.  The  Russian officials,  accustomed  to   the   indolent  and   arbitrary  ways  of   the Eastern  countries,  let   matters  drag   along,   and   eventually  decided them  by   caprice  or   for   bribes.  They   lost   their  heads  in   the European  complication  of   bureaus  and   in   the   enormous  mass  of ukases,  which  were  often  contradictory.

The  Government  of   Alexander  I.  - Alexander  I.,   brought  up by   a   Vaudois,  Laharpe,  and  imbued  with  liberal  and  humanitarian ideas,   had   attempted  to   restore  order  in   the   central  government by   regulating  the   work  of   his   ministers  ; *   they   had   to meet  in   committee  to   decide  together  on  current  affairs,   but   they did   not   form  a   ministry,  and   the   general   direction  of   policy   still depended  on  the   personal  influence  which  was  brought  to   bear upon  the   Tsar.  Peter  the   Great's  Senate  was  reduced  to  the functions  of   a   court  of   justice.   The   Council  of   State,   established in   1810,   was  simply   a   consultative  assembly,  to   give   advice  on projected  laws.

Alexander  I.,   following  the   advice  of   Speranski,  the   son  of   a pope,   an  experienced  official,  who  advocated  European  reforms, had  tried  to   emancipate  the   serfs,   reorganize  education,  codify the   laws,   and   reorganize  finance;  these  reforms  were  only   partially accomplished.  After  his   rupture  with  France  (1811)   he fell   under  the   influence  of   the   anti-French  patriotic  party,   Orthodox and   absolutist,  and   of   his   aide-de-camp  Araktcheieff.  After 1815,   deceived  by   Metternich,  who  represented  to   him  the   dangers of   revolution,  he   gave  up   all   idea  of   reform  and  left   his officials  to   restore  the   customs  of   the   eighteenth  century.  Russian political   life   withdrew  into   secret  societies  and   Free   Mason lodges,  whose  members  were  taken  principally  from  among  the high   officials  of   state  and   army.

Alexander  remained  the   autocratic  Tsar  in   his   Empire   of   Russia, but   he   wished  to   be   a   liberal  sovereign  in   his   new   European states.

Finland  and  the  Constitutional  Kingdom  of   Poland. - Alexander had   promised   to   leave   the   Grand  Duchy   of   Finland  in   possession of   its   constitution.  As   in   the   Baltic  provinces,  the   population was   entirely   Lutheran,  but   formed  of   two  classes,   one  subject to   the   other.  The   country  people,   descended  from  the   old Finnish  population,  preserved  the   Finnish  language  and  dress; all   the   privileged  classes,  nobles,  pastors,  and   bourgeois,  were Swedish;  Swedish  was  the   official  language  of   the   government. Finland,  after  coming  under  the   Tsar's  rule,   retained  its   Diet  of four  Estates,  modelled  after  the   Swedish  system  (until   1863   it

*In  1802,   8   ministers  had  been  established:  war,  navy,   foreign  affairs, finance,  commerce,  justice,  education,  and  interior.  In  1811,  4   were added:  police,  roads  and  canals,  foreign  creeds,  and  control.  After  various changes,  there  were,   in   1896,   12  ministers,  including  the   Proctor  of   the Holy   Synod.

was  not  convoked).  It   preserved  its   autonomy  complete,  its   laws, courts,  currency,  postal   system,  even  its   customs  duties.  The civil   government  was  still   intrusted  to   the   Finnish  Senate,   divided into   two  sections,  justice   and   finance,  to   native  office-holders  and municipalities,  which  meant  the   Swedish  nobility  and  middle class.  Swedish  remained  the  language  of   the   administration.

The  new  Kingdom  of   Poland,  created  in   1815   from  the   former Grand  Duchy  of   Warsaw,  included  only   a   bit   of   ancient  Poland,* the   district  assigned  to   Prussia  in   the   last   division  of   Poland (1795);   but   this   bit   was   Warsaw,  the   heart  of   the   Polish  nation in   modern  times.  Alexander,  disposed,  through  his   friendship with  Princess  Czartoryski,  to  respect  the   Polish  nation,  made Poland  an   independent  state,   joined   to   Russia  by   a  personal union  alone.  The  Tsar  bore  simply   the   title   of   King   there.  The Kingdom  of   Poland  kept   all   its   institutions  distinct,  its   Catholic Church,  with  its   donations  and   privileges,  its   schools  conducted in   the   Polish  tongue,   its   currency,  postal   system,  and   customs duties,  its   administration,  even  its   army.  Its   officials,  clergy, and   army  officers  were  all   Poles ;   offices  were  reserved  to   natives. The  only   outsiders  were  the   Viceroy,  the   Tsar's  representative, and   the   Imperial  Commissioner.

Alexander  had  held  to   his   plan   of   making   his   kingdom  a   constitutional monarchy,   in   spite   of   the   advice  of   the   absolutists. The  Charter  of   December,  1815,   guaranteed  to   the   kingdom  a native  administration  and  created  a   Diet  composed  of   a   Senate of   30   members,  appointed  by   the   King,   and   a   deputation  of   60 nuncios,  elected  by   the   nobles  and   the   cities.  The   Diet   was  convoked only   once   in   two   years,  and   then   for   a   short   session;   its deliberations  were  directed  by   an   Imperial  Commissary.  Its power  was  limited  to   voting   the   laws  and   new  taxes;   it   had   no influence  over  the   ministry,  which  was  responsible  to   the   King alone ; it   had   not  even  the   right   to   censure  the   actions  of   the   government. During   the   session  of   1818   Alexander  reminded  it that   it   "   had   met  simply   to   give   its   opinion   on  questions  which the   government  judged  it   necessary  to   submit  to   its   examina- tion." It   was  therefore  a  very   imperfect  system  of   constitutional liberty   with   a   freedom  of   the   press  very  much  restricted  by   the censorship  of   newspapers.  But  at   this   period   of   absolutism,  no

*   The   chief   part   had   been  at   first   (eleventh  or   twelfth  century)  the   province of   Posen,  annexed  to   Prussia  in   1793,   then  until   the   end   of   the   Middle Ages   it   had   been  Lesser  Poland  (Galicia),  which  Austria  had   annexed,

other  people  of   central  Europe  had   as  much  political  liberty   as the   Poles.

Society  remained  aristocratic  in   form.  The  peasants,  freed from  serfdom  since  1807,   but   without  having   received  lands,   remained in   the   condition  of   day-labourers  or   tenants,  at   the   mercy of   the   land-holding  nobles.  The  population  of   the   cities,  partially composed   of   Jews,   had   taken  almost  no  part   in   public   life. The  high   nobility  and  clergy   retained  the   management  of   the country.

The  ministry,  composed  of   former  partisans  of   Napoleon,  was at   first   controlled  by   Lubecki,  a   Lithuanian  Catholic,  who  was little   in   favour  of   the   constitutional  system  and   occupied  chiefly with  the   material  interests  of   the   kingdom.  He   succeeded  in establishing  the   Bank  of   Poland  and   the   Loan  Association,  which regulated  the   debt.  Material  prosperity  increased.  From  1815 to   1830   the   population  increased  by   a   million  and   a   half.  Great cloth  factories  were  established  at   Lodz.  Polish  bonds  went  up; the   finances  were  so  well   ordered  that   the   kingdom  was  able  to advance  one  year's   taxes  to   the   Russian  government.

This  system  did   not,   however,  become  popular  in   Poland;  it checked  both  patriotism  and  liberalism.  The  patriots  did  not accept  a   Kingdom  of   Poland  reduced  to   the   dimensions  of   the Grand  Duchy  of   Warsaw;  they   demanded  at   least  the   former provinces  of   Lithuania  which  the   Tsar  had  left   outside.  The Liberals  accused  the   government  of   violating  the   Charter  of   1815 by   dismissing  permanent  judges,  arresting  members  of   the   Diet, subjecting  books  to   censorship,  and   closing   the   primary  schools. People  complained  of   the   Imperial  Commissioner,  Novosiltzow, and  still   more  of   Viceroy  Constantine,  the  Tsar's  brother,  a whimsical  lunatic  who  forbade  broad-brimmed  hats,   and  with  his own  hand  cut  off   the   brims  of   offending  hats.

The  Diet  attempted  to  warn  the   Tsar.  He   replied  that  his subjects  must  have  unlimited  confidence  in   his   principles  of Christian  morality  (1820);  then  declared  that  Poland's  "existence was   threatened  if   she   did   not   show   herself  capable   of   maintaining herself   in   the   system  which  had   been  bestowed  upon   her." Secret  societies,  copied  from  Europe,  had  been  formed  among the   young  men.  One  of   these,   the   Patriotic  Club,   made  its   members swear  to   "   devote  their  lives  to   the   re-establishment  of   their unfortunate  and   dearly   loved  country."  The  Russian  police   discovered it;   a   court-martial  condemned  Lukazinski  to   hard  labour (1824)   for   the   mere   fact   of   having   belonged  to   a   secret  society.

Alexander  finally  forbade  the   Diet  to   make  its   deliberations public   (1825)   and   arrested  the   leader  of   the   opposition,  who   was made  a  prisoner  on   his   own  estate  under  the   perpetual  watch  of a   policeman.

The  Insurrection  of   December,  1825. - Alexander,  who  at   the end   of   his   life   had   become  an  absolutist  Tsar,   died   without  leaving a   son.  His   nearest  heir,   his   brother  Constantine,  had   before  this renounced  the   crown,  preferring  to   remain  Viceroy  of   Poland,  as he   had   married  a   Polish  woman.  His   younger  brother  Nicholas, who  was  still   in   Russia,  was   designed  as   the   successor  to   the throne;  but,   at   the   death  of   Alexander,  he   at   once  recognised Constantine  as   Tsar,  and  had  the  oaths  taken  in   his   name awaiting  a  new  renunciation  before  having  himself  proclaimed Tsar.

The  Russian  malcontents  tried  to   take  advantage  of   this   interregnum to   make   a   liberal  revolution.  There  were  then  three secret  societies  in   Russia,  copied   from  those  in   western  Europe, especially  the   Carbonari;  their  members,  as   in   Spain   and   Italy, came  from  the   most  active  part   of   the   population  at   that   time,   the army  officers.  Their  political  ideas  were  confused;  they   wished to   bring   into   Russia  the   institutions  of   western  civilization,  but they   seem  to   have  been  unable  to   agree  on  their  model.  The Northern  Society,  founded  at   Petersburg,  wanted  a  constitutional monarchy;  the  Central  Society,  recruited  in   the  garrisons  of Lesser  Russia,  preferred  a  republic;  the   United  Slavs  inclined toward  federation.  The  leaders  had  concerted  a  military  insurrection for   January  I,   1826.  The  death  of   Alexander  decided them  to   hasten  it   a   few   days;   the   conspiring  officers  took  advantage of   the   changed  situation  by   making  the   soldiers  believe that  the  rightful  Tsar  was  Constantine.  Two  regiments  at Petersburg  rose  with  the   cry   of   "Long   live   Constantine  and   the constitution  ! "  (To   the   soldiers  this   constitution  was   Constantine's  wife.)   After  a   moment  of   surprise,  the   revolt  was  checked, and  the   rebellious  soldiers  denounced  each  other.  In   the   central part   of   the   country  the   conspirators  were  arrested  before  taking action  (December,  1825).

The  revolt  of   the   Decabrists  (December)  ended  in   an  enormous prosecution;  there  were  321   accused,  almost  all   nobles,  and 5   were  condemned  to   death.  The  dramatic  execution  of   Pestel and  Rileief  was  an  event  known  all   over  Europe.  This  revolt made  a   deep   impression  on  the   new  Tsar,  Nicholas,  and  confirmed his   aversion  for   European  liberalism.  To   watch  the   susmous

pects,  a   ministry  of   political  police   was  established  under  the name  of   the   third   section  of   the   Chancellery.

The  Polish  Insurrection  (1830-32). - Nicholas  had   agreed  to   be crowned  King   in   Poland  and  to   wear  the   Polish  uniform.  But he   ceased  to   convoke  the   Diet   and   left   the   government  of   Poland to   absolutists,  who  spoke   of   revoking  the   Charter  of   1815 ;   one of   them  declared  : "   It   is   no   longer   a   question   of   discussion,  but of   obedience."

This  system   irritated  all   the   Poles,   but   they   could  not  agree  on the   course  to   pursue;  they   divided  into   two  parties.  The   great landowners,  high   officials,  and   clergy,   still   preferred  to   be   subjected to   Nicholas*  despotism  rather  than  expose  the  Polish nation  to   complete  destruction:  Poland  would  await  his   death before  taking  up   her   constitutional  life   again,   but   she   would maintain  her  independence.  This  was  the   prudent  aristocratic party,   nicknamed  the   Whites.  The  students  of   Warsaw,  who  admired France  and   the   Revolution,  wanted  open  strife  against   the Tsar  for   the   defence  of   liberty   and   the   re-establishment  of   Poland with  her  old  boundaries.  This  was  the  patriotic  democratic party,   known  as   the   Reds,   directed  by   secret  societies  in   communication with   the   Carbonari.  In   1825   the   leaders  had   had interviews  with  the   Russian  Decabrists,  but   had   been  unable  to agree  on  the   boundaries  of   Poland;  theyjvere  prosecuted  before the   Senate,   and   acquitted.

Until  1830   the   Whites  kef&gt;t   the   Reds   in   check.  But   the   French revolution  of   1830,   so  easily   victorious,  excited  the   fighting   party. The  Tsar  called  toL   ther   the   Polish  army  to   send  it   against   the revolutionists  in   France  and   Belgium.  The  revolutionists  seized the   moment  when  the   national  army  was  ready   to   march  against the   revolution  and   used  it   against   the   Tsar.  The   students  in   the military  school  surprised  the   Palace  of   Warsaw  at   night.   Constantine  was  alarmed  and   fled   half-clad;  then,   losing   his   mind,   he withdrew  from  the   kingdom,  taking   with  him  the   Russian  troops and   officials  (November-December,  1830).

The  Poles,  abandoned  by   the   Russian  government,  sent  delegates to   Constantine,  begging  him  to  return,  but  he   refused. The  Whites,  who  wished  before  all   to   avoid  war,   decided  to   form a   provisional  government  to   maintain  the   authority  of   the   Tsar. Chlopicki  consented  to   take  command  of   the   troops,  in   order  to prevent  their  following  the   revolutionary  leaders;  he   took  the dictatorship  "   in   the   King's   name/'  and   wrote  to   Nicholas  an  appeal to   his   nobility   of   soul,   excusing  the   Poles  by   "   an  unprecegates

dented  chain  of   circumstances."  He   asked  for   withdrawal  of   the Russian  army.  The  Tsar  replied  with  a  manifesto  which  demanded submission  or   death.  He   refused  the   Polish  envoys  to retract  the   manifesto  or   to   make  any  promises.  The  Poles,  he said,   must  trust  their   sovereign's  word,   and   he   added:  "   The   first cannon-shot  will   be   Poland's  ruin."

The  conciliatory  Whites  gave  up   the   direction  of   the   provisional government  to   the   belligerent  Reds.  The   Diet   proclaimed the   fall   of   the   Romanoff  dynasty  and   the   indissoluble  union  of Poland  and  Lithuania  (January,  1831).  Official  envoys  were sent  to   ask   help   from  the   great  powers  which  had  made  the treaties  of   Vienna.  In   England,  Palmerston  declared  that  the Congress  of   Vienna  had   not  guaranteed  the   constitution  of   Poland. In   France,  in   spite   of   public   demonstrations,  the   government refused  to   join   in   a   war.  Poland  was  abandoned.

The  Polish  army,  already  mobilized,  took  the  initiative  by entering  Lithuania.  But  when  Dibitsch  arrived  with  his   great force  (120,000  men  against  45,000),  the   Poles  fell   back  toward the   Vistula.  They   made  heroic  resistance  in   five   battles,  from February  to   May,   1831.   The   cholera  checked  operations.  The Russian  army,  renewed  by   re-enforcements,  finally   arrived  before Warsaw.  The  general  offered  amnesty  and  the   constitution ;   the Polish  generals  advised  acceptance.  But  the  democrats  controlled Warsaw;   they   had   just   massacred  a   number  of   suspects in   the   prisons;   they   refused  to   treat  with   the   Russians.  Warsaw was  bombarded,  and  surrendered,  September,  1831.  The  Diet withdrew;  the   remains  of   the   Polish  army  passed   into   Russia  and Austria.  A   large   Polish  emigration,  composed  chiefly   of   nobles, went  to   France  and   settled  there.

Poland  remained  under  a  military  dictatorship.  Nicholas took  away  her  independence  by   an  ukase:  "   Poland  shall  be henceforth  a  part  of   the  Empire  and  form  one  nation  with Russia."  He   abolished  the   Charter  of   1815,   replacing  it   by   the Organic  Statute  of   February,  1832.   He   suppressed  the   Diet  and the   Polish  army,  and  gave  the   power  to  a   Russian  governor, Russian  officials,  and   a   section  of   the   Council  of   St.   Petersburg. He  promised  still   to   leave  to   the   people   their   church,  their  language, and   their   distinct  administration  ; but   this   promise,  which was  without  guarantee,  was  not   kept.

Paskiewitch,  the  new  Viceroy  of   Poland,  held  an  absolute power  to   the   day   of   his   death  (25   years) ; he   surrounded  himself with  Russian  officials  and   officers,  and   kept   the   kingdom  under

a   military   reign   of   terror.  Orders  were  given   to   illuminate  in honour  of   the   Organic  Statute.  Two  hundred  and  eighty-six emigres  were  condemned  to   death;  their  estates  were  confiscated and  distributed  to   Orthodox  Russian  generals.  The  government suppressed  the   University  of   Warsaw  and   closed  most  of the   educational  institutions.  It   forbade  all   associations,  even reading  clubs,  permitting  only   the   Loan  Association.  It   forbade public   meetings,  except  private   evening   entertainments,  on condition  that  the   number  of   invitations  should  be   limited  and police   agents  received.  It   subjected  books  and   even  music  to   a censorship  which  admitted  no   foreign  book ; it   made  the   Russian language  compulsory  for   all   officials.  All   political  offences,  and even  some  others,  were  judged  by   military  commissions.  In 1835   Nicholas  made  at   Warsaw  a   famous  speech:  "   If   you   persist in   holding  to   your   dreams  of   separate  nationality,  independent Poland,  and   all   these  fancies,   you   will   involve  yourselves  in   great misfortunes.  I   have  built  a   citadel,  and   I   declare  to   you   that   at the   least   sign   of   uprising   I   will   batter  down  the   city."

The   Empire  under  Nicholas  (1825-35).- The  Tsars  since  Peter the   Great  had   kept   up   the   absolutist  regime,   but,   being   indifferent to   religious  differences,  they   admired  the   monarchies  of   civilized Europe  and   sought   to   imitate  them.  Nicholas  not  only   abhorred constitutions  and   liberal  forms  of   government,  but   he   despised European  life.  Being   a  confirmed  Orthodox,  he   felt   it   a   sacred duty   to   shut   out   from   "   Holy   Russia  "   the   ideas  of   the   heretical West.  His  reign,  which  lasted  from  1825   to  1855,   was  distinguished from   preceding   reigns   by   an  attempt  to   break  with   Western civilization  and   to   restore  the   old   Russian  system  in   the Empire. ern

Communication  with  Europe  became  difficult  ;   such  foreigners as   were  allowed  to   enter  Russia,  were  watched  by   the   police;   all books  and   papers  were  stopped  at   the   frontier  by   censors.  Russian law   did   not   recognise,  and   does   not  yet   recognise,  the   right of   subjects   to   leave   the   Empire;   under  Nicholas,  a   personal  permit from   the   Tsar   was  required;  he   gave   it   rarely   and   for   five years  at   the   most;  to   emigrate  was  and   is   a   crime  punishable  with transportation  and   confiscation.

.The  Russians,  shut  off   from  the   rest  of   the   world,  retired within  themselves.  Literature,  hitherto  imitated  from  the   West, took  on  a   Russian  character;  it   began   to  express  a  patriotic feeling   of   admiration  for   ancient  Russia.  Under  Nicholas,  the first   original   Russian  novelists  appeared.  It   was  then   that   the

national  hymn   was  composed,  "   God  Protect  the   Tsar,"  and  the national  opera,   "   Life   for   the   Tsar."

Nicholas  seems  to   have  been  devoted  to   the   work  of   rebuilding the   old   Orthodox  Russia.  But,   as  officials  were  controlled  only by   other  officials,  the   control  was  always  imaginary.  The venality  of   employees  of   every  sort,   their  negligence  in   the   conduct of   affairs,   their   insolence  toward  persons  under  their  administration, their   servility   toward  superiors,  became  so  notorious that   the   Tsar  himself  approved  the   work  of   Gogol   in   putting them  into   his   comedy  of   "   The   Inspector.'*  The   subjects  had   not even  a   means  of   protesting;  newspapers  were  forbidden  to   discuss official   acts,   individuals  to   concern  themselves  with   politics. In   1848,   at   Petersburg,  a   number  of   young  men,  officers,  employees, and   professors   had   adopted   the   habit   of   meeting   in   the evenings  to   read   and   discuss  European  publications.  The  police arrested  32   of   them  (1849);   they   were  condemned  to   death,   pardoned just   before   execution,  and   their  sentence  commuted  to hard  labour;  one  of   them,   Dostoievsky,  later  wrote  his   recollections of   the   convict  prison.

There  were  also,   under  Nicholas,  a   number  of   religious  persecutions, against   the   sect   of   Old   Believers.  Penal  laws,   still   in force,   were  adopted  against   the   conversion  of   Orthodox  believers to   any   other  religion.  Abjuration  is   punished  with  confiscation and   from  8   to   10   years  of   hard   labour;   the   attempt  to   convert  an Orthodox  believer  by   a  sermon  or  a  writing  is   punished  with  8 to   16   months'  imprisonment,  and   at   the   third  offence  with  exile to   Siberia;  a  person  who  neglects  to   hinder  the   conversion  is liable  to   imprisonment.  Every  mixed  marriage  must  be   celebrated before   a   pope,   and   the   children  of   such   marriages  brought up   to   Orthodoxy;  any   dissenting  pastor  who  should  perform such  a  marriage  would  be   prosecuted.  (This   provision,  abolished in   1865,   was  re-established  in   1885.)

Under  this  reign   began   the   attempt  to   Russianize  by   force  the subjects  in   the   western  provinces.  In   the   Polish  provinces  of Lithuania,  the   Uniate  peasants  (Catholic  Greeks)  received  orders to   accept   Orthodoxy;  then  an  assembly  of   Greek  bishops  declared the   Uniate  Church  free   from  the   Roman  clergy   and   given over  to   Orthodoxy  (1839).  In   the   Kingdom  of   Poland,  in   spite of   the   Tsar's  promise,  the   government  persecuted  the   Catholics, closing  the   churches  and   convents  under  legal   pretexts,  forbidding sermons  not   authorized  by   the   censor,  as  well   as   the   employment of   Catholic  teachers.  It   laboured  to   suppress  the   remains  of

Polish  autonomy,  subjected  the   schools  to   the   Russian  ministry  of education  (1839),  transferred  to  the   Senate  at   Petersburg  the functions  of   the   Council  of   State  and   the   Court  of   Cassation (1841),  and  extended  to   Poland  the   Russian  penal   code.

At   the   end   of   the   reign,   even   German,  the   official  language  of that  army   lacked  direction,  material,  and  management - all   that the   government  correspondence  should  be   carried  on   in   Russian, and  that  officials  must  speak   Russian.  But  it   was  not  carried into   effect.

The  "   Nicholas  system   "   was   denounced  all   over   liberal  Europe as  a   finished  form  of   Eastern  despotism;  the   literature  of   the period   is   filled   with   maledictions  against   "   the   autocrat  "   and   his government.  Nicholas  was  the  symbol  of   absolutism  in   the struggle  against   liberal  revolution,  and   loved  to   attribute  this   role to   himself.  A   military  sovereign  before  all,   always   dressed  in uniform,  busied  in   reviewing  and  watching  his   troops,  he   believed his   army  the   best   of   its   time ;   and   in   the   period   which  followed 1848   he   seemed  the   arbiter  of   Europe   and   the   future  conqueror of   the   Ottoman  Empire.  The  Crimean  war  showed  that that  army   lacked  direction,  material,  and   management - all   that which  demands  orderly  habits  and  control.  Conquered  by   the Westerners  whom  he   despised,  Nicholas  died  broken-hearted  and his   system   fell   through   (1855).

Liberal  Reaction  against  the  "   Nicholas  System." - Alexander II.   spoke   of   his   father  with   respect  and   retained  the   staff   which had  served  him;   but,   as  a   humane  and  educated  sovereign,  he shrank  from  the   system  of   compression  and  isolation;  he   therefore revived  the   imitation  of   the   civilized  societies  of   Europe. Without  wishing  to   bind  himself  by   a   constitution,  he   announced his   intention  of   making  reforms  and   appealed  to   the   nobles  for assistance.

Immediately  public  opinion,  which  had  remained  hidden  until now,  sprang  into   life.  It   was  shown  among  the   educated  nobles and  students,  known  in   Russia  as  the   intcltiguenzia - the   intelligent part   of   the   nation.  The  Crimean  war  had  suddenly changed  the   tone  of   society:   the   Tchinovniks  (officials),  responsible for   malfeasances  and   neglects   which  defeat  had   exposed,  had lost   their  assurance  and  dared  not  hinder  criticism  of   their actions.  The  censorship  was  not  suppressed,  but,   feeling  itself no   longer   in   favour,   it   relaxed  its   efforts.  No   newspaper  published in   Russia  was  as  yet   able  to   speak   freely,   but   a   refugee, Herzen,  published  at   London  a  newspaper,  the   Kolokol  (Bell),

whose  numbers,  though  prohibited,  found  their  way   into  Russia by   the   thousand;  Alexander  II.   himself  read  them,   to   keep   informed on   the   abuses  of   power.  It   is   said   that  an  official denounced  in   one   issue  placed   before  the   Tsar  a   falsified  number in   which  the   article  was  suppressed;  some  time  later  the   Tsar received  from  London  a   letter  containing  the   article  with  an  exposure of   the   trick.

The  intelliguenzia  was  agreed  in   demanding  reforms;  but   on the   nature  of   the   reforms  they   were  divided  into  two  camps. The  great  majority  desired  liberal  institutions  like  those  in Europe,  representative  assemblies,  a  constitution,  and  guarantees of   liberty:  these  were  the   westerners,  the   liberal  party,  who predominated  at   Petersburg.  Some,  on  the   other  hand,   wished to   go   back  to   the   days   before  Peter  the   Great,   to   suppress  the European  importations  of   the   eighteenth  century,  and   to   restore the   institutions  of   the   Russian  people   in   their   purity,   Orthodoxy and   the   patriarchal  aristocracy.  These  were  the   nationalists,  the patriotic  party,   formed,  during   the   regime   of   isolation,  at   Moscow, the   old   capital,   abandoned  since   the   time   of   Peter   the   Great. This  historic  school,  essentially  Russian,  was  nevertheless  an imitation  of   the   West,   a   Russian  form  of   romanticism;  the   old Russia  which  it   wished  to   restore  was  an   imaginary  Russia  like the   Middle  Ages   of   the   romanticists;  it   took  the   bo'iars  for   a   national parliament  and   the   mir   for   a   primitive   free   commune.

The  two  parties   began   by   working  together  against  the   officials- the   common  enemy  of   every  reform.  They   demanded,  besides liberty   of   the   press   and   of   education,  a   control  over  the officials  and,   above  all,   emancipation  of   the   serfs.  Alexander followed  their  advice.  He   recalled  some  of   the   Siberian  exiles, modified  the   censorship,  permitted  travel,   including  trips   to   other countries,  and   prepared  a   scheme  for   emancipation  of   the   serfs. Without  changing  his   ministers  or  the   political  institutions  of his   empire,   he   allowed  his   subjects   an  amount  of   freedom  beyond precedent.

The   Emancipation  of   the   Serfs  (1858-63). - The   most  important measure  of   the   reign   was  the   reform  of   the   land   system,  coupled with  the   liberation  of   the   serfs.  If   we   leave  out   of   sight   the   two extremes  of   the   country, - the   north  inhabited  by   landowning peasants,  the   south  studded  with   foreign   colonies  or  peopled   with Cossacks, - almost  the  whole  of   historical  Russia  was   held   in large   estates  with   serfs   as   labourers.  This   system  rested  on   three institutions  :

1.   The   land   was   held   in   large   estates,  partly   belonging  to   the Tsar  and  the   imperial  princes,  the   rest  to   about  100,000  noble families.     The  large   estates  absorbed  nine-tenths  of   the   whole arable  land  of   the   Empire.     Each  estate  was   divided  into  two parts,  the   one   farmed  directly  by   the   owner,  the   other  handed over  to   a   village   of   peasants   in   return  for   a   yearly   payment.
2.   The   peasants  were  attached  to   the   soil   by   law.     As   a   result they   found  themselves  bound  to   the   proprietor  of   the   land :   they paid   him  dues,   performed  for   him  compulsory  labour,  obeyed him  as   their   master.     Their  condition  was  that   of   mediaeval  serfs (the   Russian  word  designating  them  is   translated  by   serf).      But the   proprietors  were  not  satisfied  to  act  merely  as  mediaeval barons;  they   used  their  power,  practically  unlimited,  to   transform themselves  into  masters  in   the   old   sense.     Often  they   detached the   peasant   from  the   land   and   used   him   according  to   their  fancy. They   sent  serfs  to   establish  themselves  in   towns  as  artisans,  or traders,  requiring  them  to   pay   a   periodical  due   from  their  earnings (the   obrok)   and   reserving  the   right   to   call   them  home  at pleasure.     About  2,000,000  of   serfs  were  employed  in   the   personal service   of   their   masters  about  their   residences;  their   condition was   that   of   ancient  slaves.     In   Russian  society   of   the nineteenth  century  all   the   characteristics  of   Roman  slavery  reappeared: unbridled  brutality   on   the   part   of   the   masters,  servile submission  on  the   part   of   the   serfs;   the   female  serfs   handed  over to   the   caprice   of   the   master,  the   men  compelled  to   follow  all trades,  and   avenging  themselves  by   murders  and   house-burnings (70   at   least   each   year   on  an  average),  beaten,   mutilated,  done  to death.     The   picture   is   the   same   in   all   the   descriptions  of   Russian life.*
3.   The   part   of   the   estate  cultivated  by   the   peasants  was  not divided  up   into   separate   holdings,  as   in   the   case  of   the   mediaeval serfs.     The   Russian  serf   had   nothing  but   his   house  as  an   individual possession;  it   was  the   village   as  a   whole,   the   mir,   that   held the   land   collectively.     The   woods,  the   pastures,  the   streams  were used  in   common;  the   meadows  and  plough-lands  were  distributed in   portions,  but   for   a   term  only,   varying   in   length   from  two to   fifteen  years,  according  to   the   custom  of   each  region.      At   the end   of   the   term  the   whole  was  returned  to   the   condition  of   common property  and   redistributed.     The  Russians  have  so   little studied  their  country  that  this   institution  had  only   lately   been mon

*The  most  striking  is   that  given  in   Tourguenef's   "Souvenirs  d'un Chasseur."

made  known  to   the   world,  and   that   by   a   foreigner,  Haxthausen  ; but   as   soon  as   known,  the   mir   had   become  one  of   the   favourite institutions  of   the   National  party  - a   venerable  relic  of   ancient Russia,  a   survival  of   the   collective  ownership  that   was   believed to   have   been   the   primitive  system  of   the   human  race.*

This  condition  of   affairs  made  reform  far   from  easy.   Alexander began   by   consulting  the   provincial  nobles.  He   wished them  to   take   the   initiative,  but   they   preferred  to   keep   their   serfs. The  Tsar  stood  firm;   he   brought  together  a   "   committee  on  the state  of   the   peasantry,"  which  prepared  a  plan   of   emancipation. Then  the   question  was  officially  brought  to   the   attention  of   the governor  of   Wilna;  the  Tsar,  speaking  as   if   the  nobles  of Lithuania  were  in   favour  of   the   reform,   authorized  them  to   form committees  "   to   improve  the   lot   of   the   peasants  "   (November, 1857).  He   brought  it   to   the   notice  of   the   nobles  of   the   other provinces  also,   and   compelled  them,   too,   to   form  committees  for the   discussion  of   his   project.

A   declaration,  in   1858,   laid   down  the   principles  of   the   reform: the   peasants  should  buy   out  their  master's  claim  to   their  houses and  garden-plots  with  a  sufficient  area  of   farming-land  to   live upon;  the   state  should  aid   them  to   pay.   The   Tsar  set  an  example by   freeing  the   serfs  on   the   lands  belonging  to   members of   the   imperial   family ; these  serfs  were  at   once  turned  into   landowners, subject   to   an   annual  payment   for   forty-nine  years   (Settlement of   1863).!  For  the  serfs  of   the   ordinary  estates,  the emancipation,  hindered  by   the   passive  resistance  of   the   nobles, took  more  than  three  years  to   complete  it.   The  Ukase  of   February 19,   1  86  1,   finally   abolished  serfdom. tlement

The  serfs  that   had   been   living   detached  from   the   land,   domestic servants,  and   those  under  the   obrok  were  declared  free,   but   without right   to   property.  These  came  into  the   condition  of   the ordinary  European  day-labourers.  The  situation  of   the  peasants on   the   land,   much   more   difficult  to   regulate,   presented  three questions  for   solution:

*   It   is   probable   that   the   mir   is   a   recent  institution,  created,  like   all   other Russian  institutions,  by   order  of   the   Tsar,   to   facilitate  the   collection  of the  taxes  by   making  the  villages  responsible  collectively.  It   does  not clearly   appear,  in   the   sources  before  the   sixteenth  century,  and   it   was  not formerly  established  in   Little  Russia.  (See   Keussler.)
- f The  peasants  on   the   Tsar's  own  crown  estates  had   not   been  treated  as serfs,  but   as   farmers  under  obligation  to   remain  on   the   crown  estates  ; they   were  in   1866  made  into  free  farmers  on   long   leases,  with  the   right   of buying  out  the  crown's  right   in   their  lands.

38

1.   The   Peasant's  Right   in   the   Land. - The   nobles,  in   law   the owners  of   the   soil,   wished  to   keep   the   whole  of   it.      The   peasants regarded  themselves  as   the   legitimate  owners  of   land   which  they had  cultivated  from  generation  to  generation  and  from  which they   could  not   be   lawfully   evicted.     The   serfs   of   a   certain  village, whose  master  offered  them  liberty  on  condition  of   leaving  the land,   replied:   "We  are  yours,   but   the   land   is   ours."    The   enfranchisement in   the   Grand  Duchy  of   Warsaw,  in   1807,   and   in the   Baltic  provinces  from  1816  to   1820,   had   consisted  in   declaring the   serfs   free   and   the   noble   the   sole   owner  of   the   land.    The result  had   been   to  transform   the    peasants    into   needy    daylabourers  or   tenants-at-will.     To   avoid  the   creation  of   a   similar agricultural  proletariat  in   Russia,  a   device  was  adopted.     The peasant-lands  were  divided  into  two  parts :   the   landlord  kept   one, and  the   other  was  allotted  to   the   peasants;  they   got   the   right   to redeem  the   landlord's  interest  in   it   and   in   the   house  and   garden, but  with  the   consent  of   the   landlord  and   on  payment  of   a   sum sufficient  to   compensate  him  for   the   land  and   the   lost   right   to services.    The   state  advanced  four-fifths  of   the   sum  necessary two  thousand  five   hundred  millions  in   all.*   The   peasants  came under  obligation  to   reimburse  the   government  by   paying  six   per cent,  on  the   sum  advanced,  for   forty-nine  years.      The  portion assigned  to   each   peasant  and   his   share  of   the   debt   to   the   government varied   according  to   the   quality   of   the   land.
2.   System   of   Peasant  Proprietors. - Ought   the   ownership  in   the new  land-system  to   be   individual   or  collective?     It   was  the fashion  at   that   time  to   speak   of   the   danger   that   the   peasants might   become  mere  hired  labourers,  as   in   so  many   Western  communities.    There   was  a   hope   of   avoiding  this   danger   by   retaining the   common  ownership  of   the   mir.     Under  the   influence  of Miliutin  it   was  decided  that,   in   principle,  the   land  should  be granted,  not  to   the   individual  peasant,  but   to   the   commune  as a   body,   giving   the   assembly  the   right   to   assign   it,   by   two-thirds vote,   as   private   property,  to   its   members.

3.   Rights   of   the   Nobles  over  the   Peasants. - The   nobles  wished  to retain  the   police   jurisdiction  over  their  peasants,  as   in   the   Baltic provinces.     The   Tsar  preferred  to   deprive  the   former  masters  of all   legal   authority  and   to   give   the   police   powers  to   the   assemblies of   the   peasants.     The   mir,   formed  of   the   heads  of   families, presided  over  by   a   village   elder,   decides  on   the   admission  of   new

* According  to   Wallace's  "   Russia  M   the   nobles  had,   for   the   most  part,   to remit  the   other  fifth.- TR.

members,  settles  the   distribution  of   the   land   and   the   taxes  ; it   can inflict  corporal  punishments  and  even  expel   from  the   commune - a   very   heavy   punishment,  for   the   expelled  peasant  is   driven into   distant  exile,   often  to   Siberia.  The  Volost,  a   union  of   several villages,   has   an  assembly  of   elected  delegates,  an  elected head  and  collectors  of   taxes,  and  a  secretary;  it   has   charge   of certain  common  burdens - roads,  schools,  and   relief  of   the   poor. It   has   an  elective  tribunal,  which  judges   in   minor  cases  under customary  law,   and   can  sentence  to   imprisonment  or  whipping.

The  Ukase  of   1861  settled  the   principles  of   the   reform  at   one stroke;  but   it   gave   time   for   applying  them  and   created  special courts  for   settling   disputes  as   to   sharing   the   lands  or   fixing   the compensations.  It   was  assumed  that  the   redemptions  would  be completed  in   twenty  years.  The  process  was  slower  than  the forecast.  In   1882   there  were  still   a   million  and   a   half   of   peasants who  had   not  redeemed  the   claims  of   the   nobles.  The   economic results  did   not  at   first   correspond  to   the   expectations.  The nobles  had   set   too   high   a   valuation  on   their  rights   and   too   low an  estimate  on   the   quantity  of   land   necessary  to   support  a   peasant. The   compensation,  fixed  at   from  8   to   10  rubles  for   each allotment,  exceeded  the   value  of   the   land;   in   the   central  regions the   allotments  were  less   than   12   acres;  a   third   of   the   peasants  got less   than  8   acres.  The  people,  unable  to   live  on  the  land assigned,  emigrated  or  went  off   to   work  as   hired  labourers.  So a   class   of   agricultural  day-labourers  came  into   existence - a   result which  the   mir   was  expected  to   prevent.  But   the   mir   is   breaking up   of   its   own  accord,  in   proportion  as  population  increases;  for land  is   lacking  for   the   newcomers.  In   1882  it   was  estimated that   ten   per   cent,  of   the   families  in   the   government  of   Moscow were  without  land.  The  compensations  paid   to  the  nobles, amounting  to  700,000,000  of   rubles  up   to  1890,   have  not  resulted, as   was  expected,   in   improving  agriculture.  The   nobles have  gone  on  selling   their  lands  to   capitalists  whose  only   object in   buying   is   to   cut   down  the   forests  for   timber.

Meanwhile  the   emancipation  of   the   serfs  has   transformed  Russian society.   By   giving   the   mass  of   the   population  equal   liberty and  the   management  of   their  communal  affairs  it   has   converted Russia  into   a   modern  state.  It   has   prepared  her   to*   deliver  herself from  arbitrary  practices,  from  the   servility  and   sloth  that   attend slavery,  and  has   brought  her   the   legal   conditions  that  go   with private  enterprise  and   orderly  public   administration.  The  economic progress  of   the   country  showed  itself  at   the   end   of   Alex-

ander  II.'s  reign   by   the   increased  area  of   cultivation,  increased value  of   land,   greater  yield   of   the   taxes,   increase  of   export   trade, and  improved  condition  of   the   peasantry.

Alexander  II.'s  Liberal  Reforms. - After  this  great  social  reform the   Liberals  expected  a   constitution.  Alexander  refused to   grant   one.  The  assembly  of   the   nobles  of   Tver  having   asked for   "   the   convocation  of   a   national  assembly  of   deputies  from   all parts  of   the   Empire,"  thirteen  of   its   members  were  arrested. The  Tsar  carried  out  a   series  of   limited  reforms  which  must  serve to   indicate  that   the   scope  of   his   plan   was  to   abolish  privileges  and class  distinctions  with  a  view  to  consolidating  all   his   subjects into  one  nation  on   the   basis  of   equality.

1.   Justice   had   been  dispensed  by   administrative  officers  with secret  and   written  procedure,  in   the   eighteenth-century  manner. It   was  now  remodelled  to  accord  with  the   nineteenth  century. The  Tsar  decreed,  in   1862,   that  the   judicial  power  should  be independent  of   the   administration  and   reserved  for   regular   courts organized  in   a   gradation  of   jurisdictions,  on   the   Western  model - justices  of   the   peace   (sitting   singly),   sessions  of   several  justices of   the   peace   (as   in   England),  district  courts,  supreme  court, Senate  (acting  as  a   court  of   final   appeal).     As   in   other  countries, prosecuting  attorneys  were  appointed,  a   bar   instituted,  trial  by jury   for   criminal  cases  established,  together  with  publicity  of proceedings  and  secure  tenure  for   the   judges.     These  reforms had   a   political   bearing:   they   established  equal   justice   for   all,   surrounded  by    guarantees    against   arbitrary    interference.     They made  the  justices  of   the   peace   local  representatives,  for   they must  be   elected  by   the   municipal  councils  of   the   cities  and   by the   Zcmstvos.

2.   To   make  up   for   the   refusal  of   a   voice  in   the   government, the   people   are  called  on   to   take   part   in   the   local   administration. Self-government  was  the   fashion  in   Europe  at   the   time:  it   was represented   as   the    only    solid   foundation   of   political    liberty. Therefore  two  grades  of   local  assemblies,  or   Zemstvos,  were  instituted: one   for   each   district  in   a   province,  and   a   central  assembly for   the   whole  province.     The   Zemstvo  of   the   district  is   composed of   deputies  elected  by   the   three  recognised  classes,  nobles,  city people,  and  peasants,  the   first   two  classes  electing  their  representatives directly,   the   other   class   choosing   electors  to   choose for   them.     The   Zemstvo  of   the   province  is   composed  of   delegates elected  by   the   discrict  assemblies.     It   holds  but   one  short  session yearly;   it   elects   a   standing   committee  for   three  years.      The

assemblies  of   both  grades   are  to   act  on   "   matters  connected  with the   economic  interests  and   needs  "   of   the   people:   roads,   bridges, public   buildings,  churches  and   schools,  relief  of   the   poor,  prisons, public   health.  They   have  the   right   of   imposing  local  taxes.

3.   The   preventive  censorship  of   books  and  newspapers  was abolished  in   the   two  capitals,  St.   Petersburg  and  Moscow,  in 1865,   and   was  replaced  with  the   system  used  in   France  under Napoleon  III. - administrative  notice  in   case  of   objectionable articles  and   suspension  in   case  of   repetition  of   the   offence.     In the   other  cities   the   old   censorship  was  retained.

4.   Public  schools  on   the   European  model  were  organized.     By the   side   of   the   old   classical   "   gymnasium,"   institutions   were founded  for   giving   a   modern  scientific  education,  on  the   model of   the   German  Realschule.

5.   The   army  was  reorganized  on  the   Prussian  model.     The twenty-five-year  service  for   a   limited  number  was  replaced  by obligatory  short-term  service  for   all   (1873).

The  Polish  Insurrection  of   1863. - The  severe  measures  of Nicholas  had   not   destroyed  the   Polish  nation.  The  nobles  had retired  to   their   estates  and   lived  among  their  peasantry;  they, the   women,  and  the   clergy   had  fostered  the  national  feeling among  the   rising   generation.  The  Polish  exiles  were  urging Europe  to  intervene  in   order  to  re-establish  Poland.  The aristocratic  exiles  gathered  about  Prince  Czartoriski  in   Paris were  counting  on  the  help   of   the  Catholic  countries.  The young  Poles  who  had  joined  the  democratic  parties  in   various countries  were  looking  for  a  new  European  revolution.  The national  movement  extended  to  the  Polish  regions  of   Lithuania, which  had   been  incorporated  with  Russia  proper  and were  officially  known  as   "   the  Governments  of   the  North- west." Alexander  II.   would  have  no   independent  Poland.  To   the deputies  of   the   nobles  at   Warsaw  he   said:  "   Let   us   have  no   idle dreams.  Embrace  the  union  with  Russia  and  abandon  all thoughts  of   independence,  now  and  forevermore  impossible. All   that  my   father  did   was  rightly   done.  My   reign   shall  be   a continuation  of   his."  But,   in   practice,  Gortschakoff,  the   new governor,  relaxed  the   severity  of   the   repressive  system.

The  Polish  nobles  had  been  allowed  to  retain  their  control  in the   rural  districts.  Each  in   his   own   domain  had   the   legal   ownership of   the   soil,   the   charge   of   police   and   village   administration, together   with   the   right   of   choosing  the   priests.   The   Agro-

nomic  Society,  founded  in   1855,   supplied  them  with  a   mechanism for   acting   in   concert.  It   had   more  than   5000   members.  A central  committee  at   Warsaw  directed  its   action.

Alexander  II.   was  at   that   time   expected  to   make  liberal  reforms in   Poland.  One  of   the   leaders  of   the   aristocratic  party,  the Marquis  Wielopolski,  at   his   request  submitted  reports   for   his   examination ; but   the   government  at   Petersburg  took  no   further  action. The   Poles   grew   tired   of   waiting   and   began   to   make  public demonstrations  in   1860  and  1861.  These  were  at   first  massmeetings,  passive  and  silent,  to  celebrate  the  anniversaries of   the   revolution  of   1830.   On   the   occasion  of   one  of   these  celebrations, under   the   auspices   of   the   Agronomic  Society,  the crowd  was  charged  by   Russian  soldiers.  The  burial  of   the   victims gave   occasion  for   one  more  manifestation  of   popular   feeling. The   Agronomic  Society   sent  to   the   Tsar   an  address  claiming the   "   institutions  emanating  from  national  spirit,   its   traditions and   its   history." tion. ing; ing

As   in   1830,   the   malcontents  were  divided  into   two  parties,   the Whites,  the   party  of   the   great   landowners,  united  in   the   Agronomic Society,   and   the   Reds,   the   democratic  party,   made  up   of the   students,  officers,  and   young  men  of   Warsaw,  directed  by   a secret  central  committee.  Alexander  decided  to  give   the   government to   Marquis  Wielopolski,  who  accepted  Russian  domination in   order  to   save  Polish  self-government;  Grand  Duke  Constantine,  the   friend  of   the   Liberals,  was  appointed  viceroy.  But the   Polish  patriots  wanted  to   see  their   country   independent.  The

Alexander,  drawn  in   opposite  directions  by   two  parties,  wavered between  two  policies:  whether  to   make  liberal  concessions and  appease  the   Poles,  or   to   suppress  these  demonstrations  by force.  In   March,  1861,   he   granted  Poland  a  separate  ministry of   education  and   public   worship,  to   which  he   appointed  the   Marquis of   Wielopolski,  a   Pole;   he   also   granted  a   Council  of   State and  elective  provincial  assemblies.  In   April   he   suppressed  the Agronomic  Society;  a  crowd  gathered  to   demand  its   restoration, and   the   affair   ended  in   a   massacre.  Between  May,   1861, and   June,   1862,   the   Tsar' changed  the   governor  five   times,   sometimes appointing  a   friend,   sometimes  an  enemy,  to   the   Poles. The  demonstrations  continued,  notably  on  the   anniversary  of   the union  with  Lithuania  and  the  death  of   Kosciusko.  The  mob took  refuge   in   the   churches  and   was   driven  out   by   the   soldiers. The  electors  of   the   provincial  assemblies  refused  to  vote,   demanding an   "   elective  representation  with  free   discussion."

Reds  regarded  Wielopolski  as  a   traitor,  and   attempted  to   assassinate him   in   July   and   August,   1862.  The   Whites  refused  to support  him.  In   response  to   a  proclamation  from  Constantine, enumerating  the   reforms  to   be   made,  a  meeting  of   the   nobility declared  it   impossible  to   maintain  the   government  "   unless  it   was a   national  Polish  government,  with  all   the   provinces  united  under free  laws."  The  nobility  of   Podolia  and  Lithuania  voted  addresses demanding  union  with   the   Kingdom  of   Poland.

In   order  to   rid   himself  of   the   democratic  party,   Wielopolski planned  to   make  use  of   military  recruiting.  He   issued  a   secret order  for   levying  recruits,  not,   as  was  the   custom,  from  among the   peasants,  but   in   the   cities,   and   without  excepting  the   students, choosing   by   preference  persons   "   of   ill   repute  since  the late   troubles."  At   Warsaw  the   young  men  designated  were  arrested at   night   and   imprisoned  in   the   citadel.  But   the   majority had  been  warned  in   time  and  had  taken  refuge   in   the   woods. Thus  began   the   insurrection  of   1863.

It   was  a   secret  revolt,   altogether  different  from  that   of   1830. The  insurgents  had   at   no   time  either  army,  government,  or   fixed centre.  They   were  not   in   control  of   any   city,   the   whole  country remaining  in   the   power  of   the  Russian  officials  and  soldiers. But   armed  bands,  formed  in   the   forests,  appeared  suddenly,  made little  skirmishes,  and  finally   took  refuge   on   Austrian  soil,   in Galicia.  The  secret  central  committee  at   Warsaw  printed  and posted   proclamations,  gave  orders,  levied  contributions,  and   bore itself   like   a   government,  while  the   Poles  obeyed   it   without  letting the   Russian  police   discover  it   (it   met   in   the   University  buildings). This  committee  first  declared  itself  a  provisional  government and  issued  a   proclamation  against  "   the   foreign   government  of brigands,"  promising  to  the  peasants  ownership  of   their  land and  to   the   landlords  indemnity  at   the   state's  expense.  All   who took  part   in   the   war  were  to   receive  allotments  of   land   (January, 1863).  In   March  it   enjoined  the   Polish  subjects  of   Austria  and Prussia  fo   make  no  revolt  in   their  provinces,  but   to   "   concentrate all   the   national  force  against   the   most  terrible  enemy,  the   Russian Tsar."  It   begged   them  to   send   men,  arms,  and   money  to the   Poles  in   Russia.  It   appointed  successively  two   dictators, then  proclaimed  itself  "   the   national  government."  Another  secret committee,  formed  at   Wilna,  called  itself   the   "   national  government "   in   Lithuania,  declaring  the   country  an   inseparable  part of   Poland  (March  31).   Then  the   provinces  of   the   southwest, Volhynia,  Podolia,  and   Ukraine,  revolted  in   May,   1863.

The  secret  government  of   Warsaw  began  to  publish  newspapers and   to   give   official  orders  stamped  with   a   seal.  It   forbade Poles   to   pay   taxes  to   Russians,  to   accept  partial   amnesty, to   go   to   the   theatres,  sing   in   churches,  or  ring   bells.  It   ordered the   wearing   of   mourning,  established  a   compulsory  loan   and   contribution. Its   orders  were  obeyed.  In   each  circle  it   established a  revolutionary  tribunal  of   three  members  to   judge   offences against  the   national  cause;  the   Warsaw  tribunal  condemned  to execution,  or  rather  assassinated,  ten   Russian  agents.

The  Poles  did   not  expect  to   deliver  their   country  through   their own  efforts,  but   hoped   for   the   intervention  of   the   European powers.  However,  Bismarck,  who  governed  Prussia,  aided Russia  by   signing  a  secret  convention  closing  the  Prussian frontier  to   the   insurgents.  The   Prussian  Landtag  even  accused him  of   delivering  up   refugees.  The  three  other  great  states, France,  Austria,  and   England,  arranged  to   send  identical  notes to  the   Russian  Government.  They   urged  "six  points":  I. amnesty;  2.  national  legislative  representation;  3.   national  administration by   Polish  officials;  4.   complete  religious  liberty;   5. Polish  as   the   official  language ; 6.   a   regular   system  of   recruiting. Three  times  the  European  governments  took  this  collective action  in   favour  of   Poland  (April,   June,   and   August,   1863).   But they   were  not  sufficiently  tenacious  of   their  claims  to   support them  with  actions.  The  Russian  government  simply  replied  that it   was  not   bound  by   the   treaties  of   1815   in   the   government  of Poland  and  that  the  insurrection,  the   work  of   "   the   party  of disorder,"  was  sustained  only   by   the   hope   of   intervention.

Repression  of   the   Polish  National  Movement. - In   Russia,  the Liberals  had   at   first   favoured  the   Poles  in   their   common  demand for   political  liberty.  Herzen  sided  with  them,  the   Petersburg students  assisted  at   a   funeral  service  for   the   Warsaw  victims,  and Bakounine  formed  a  volunteer  corps.  But  the  little  Russian nationalist  party  of   Moscow  supported  the   government  against the   insurgents.  Katkoff,  editor  of   the   Moscow  Gazette,  and   an enemy  to   Europeans,  attacked  the   Poles  as   false  to   the   Slavic brotherhood.  He  said  that  in   fighting   the   only   state  capable  of bringing  the   Slavic  idea  to   triumph  they   were  acting   as  aristocrats and   enemies  of   the   Orthodox  religion.  The   Poles'  intention of   taking  Lithuania  again,   a   partially  Russian  and  Orthodox country,  served  to   excite  Russian  patriotism.  A   wave  of public   opinion,  shown  by   addresses  to   the   Tsar,   urged   the   government to   a   patriotic  and   religious  crusade  against   the   Poles.

Thus  repression  took  on  a   Russian  and   Orthodox  character,  and was  more  systematic  than  in   1832.

It   began   with   the   Lithuanian  provinces.  Mouravief,  appointed governor-general  of   the   four  Lithuanian  governments,  in   May, 1863,   subjected  the   country  to   a   "   military   civil   administration." In   each   district  an  officer,   called  prefect   of   war  and   invested  with absolute  power,  was  charged  with  the   supervision  of   all   the   authorities, clergy,   and   landowners;  he   was   to   dismiss  every  officeholder, arrest   and   send   before  a   council  of   war  every   individual suspected  of   having   aided  the   insurgents  or  even  of   not   having denounced  them.  He   was  to   sequestrate  the   estates  of   any   who should  give   assistance  to   the   insurgents  or  attempt  to   overthrow the   government.  Mouravief  systematically  crushed  the  Polish aristocracy.  He   imposed  an   income  tax  of   10  per   cent,  on  the estates  of   the   nobility,   payable   within  eight   days   under  penalty   of the   sale   of   their   personal  property.  He   employed  their  Orthodox peasants  against   the   Polish  Catholic  landlords.  While  he disarmed  the   whole  population  he   created  armed  bodies  of   peasants and   sent   them   in   pursuit   of   insurgents,  promising  a   bounty for   each   prisoner.  He   distributed  the   possessions  of   insurgent nobles  among  the   peasants,  giving   preference  to   those  that  had distinguished  themselves  in   the   campaign  of   repression.  All   insurgents taken   with   arms  upon   their  persons  were  executed within  24   hours,   and   mourning  for   them  was   forbidden.  Landlords were  ordered  to  remain  on  their  estates  and  were made  responsible  for  every  act  of   insurrection  within  their domain.

When  the  insurrection  was  put   down,  Mouravief  began  to Russianize  Lithuania.  In   February,  1864,   ne   declared  Russian the   only   official  language;  he   then   closed  the   Polish  bookstores and  publishing  houses,  and  forbade  the   building  or  repairing  of Catholic  churches  without  special   permission.  Later  he   ordered that  Catholic  religious  instruction  should  be   given   in   Russian. The  Polish  language  and  the   Roman  alphabet  were  forbidden even  in   private   life;   it   was  a   crime  for   a   tradesman  to   answer  a customer  in   Polish.  Mouravief  was  nicknamed  by   the  Poles "   the   butcher  of   Wilna  "  ;   but   the   Russian  patriots  extolled him  and  established  a  national  holiday  in   memory  of   the deliverance  of   Lithuania  and  the  subjugation  of   the  Polish nobility.

In   the   southwestern  provinces  the   Russian  governors  crushed the   Polish  movement  by   similar  processes,  arresting  the   patriotic

nobles  and   sending  them  to   Siberia,  and   replacing  native  officials with  Orthodox  Russians.  The  United  Greek  Church  was  turned into   the   Orthodox  Church.

In   the   Kingdom  of   Poland,  the   governor,  as  military  dictator, surrounded  Warsaw  in   September,  1863,   and  searched  all   the houses  without  finding  the  central  committee.  He  revenged himself  by   imposing  a  special  contribution  and  arresting  hundreds of   suspects.  The  Poles,  despairing  of   European  support, gave  up   the   battle  in   February,  1864.  The  members  of   the committee  were  found  and  hanged  in   August.

The  Polish  patriots,  suspected  of   sympathy  with  the   insurgents, were  arrested  in   all   the   Polish  districts  and   transported  in a   body   to   Siberia,   either  as   free   exiles  or  condemned  to   enforced labour  in   the   mines.  A   "   government  commission  "   invested with  absolute  power  was  charged  with  the   reorganization  of   Poland. The   head   of   the   commission  undertook  " to   root  out   Latin civilization  and  replace  it   with  a   true   Slavic  civilization."  All the   institutions  belonging  to   Poland  were  destroyed,  and   in   1867 the   country  was   divided  into   10  governments  and   85   districts  like the   rest  of   the   Empire   and   with   the   same  administrative  system. The  governing  boards  were  removed  from  Warsaw  to   Petersburg.

Polish  patriotism  had  been  shown  especially  by   the   nobles, students,  and   clergy;   it   was   kept   up   by   the   Polish  language  and the   Catholic  religion,  which  made  the   Poles  feel   themselves  a   different nation   from   the   Russians.  The  Russian  government wished  to   exterminate  Polish,  and   made  Russian  the   language  of education  in   the   University  of   Warsaw,  the   secondary  colleges, and  the   primary  schools.  It   forbade  the   use  of   Polish  in   all   administrative acts,   then   in   judicial  acts   (1876),   and   finally   in   the churches,  in   signs,   and   in   public   notices.

In   order  to   weaken  the   clergy   the   majority  of   the   monastic bodies  were  suppressed  in   1864.  Of   155   monasteries  with  1635 monks  there  remained  25   with  360;   of   42   convents  with  549   nuns there  remained  10  with  140.   As   the   secular  clergy   could  not   be destroyed,  they   were  subjected  to   political  supervision  and   their estates  secularized - the  Church  receiving  in   return  grants  of money  from  the   state  (1865).  The  concordat  with  the   Pope   was abrogated  in   1866   in   spite   of   the   remonstrances  of   Pius   IX.   The administration  of   the   Catholic  Church  was  handed  over  to  the ecclesiastical  college  at   Petersburg.  Orders  were  given   to   the United  Greek  clergy   to   use  the   Russian  language  and  suppress

all   Roman  Catholic  rites.  Then  the   Uniate  Church  of   Poland was  detached  from  Rome  and  made  a  part  of   the  Orthodox Church.

In   order  to   destroy   the   power  of   the   nobility   in   the   country,  a radical  land  reform  was  made  in   March,  1864.  The  peasants occupying  lands  under  the   crown,  clergy,  and  nobles,  were  declared proprietors   of   their   houses  and   cattle,   and   the   land   of   which they   had   been  only   tenants.  All   seigniorial  dues  and   compulsory services  were  abolished  and  replaced  by   an  annual  tax  of   considerably less   amount - two-thirds  of   the   annual  value  of   the services  and   four-fifths  of   the   annual  dues.  The  government  received the   tax   and   compensated  the   landowners  by   an  annuity   of 5   per   cent,   for   42   years.   The   village   became  a  commune  administered by   the   assembly  of   peasants,  a   mayor,  and   a   summary tribunal,  both  elected.  The  priest   and  the   noble  were  excluded from  the   assembly.  The  nobles  lost   by   this   reform  about  onehalf  of   their  income  and   all   rights   over  their  former  peasants. The  peasants  not  only   became  at   a   stroke  independent  of   their lords,   but   they   received  more  land  and   with  fewer  charges   than the  Russian  peasants.  Another  measure  toward  Russification was  to   forbid  Poles  to   acquire   lands  in   Poland.

It   does   not   appear  that   the   government  has   succeeded  in   Russianizing the   Polish  people.  But  it   has   not  restored  the   former institutions,  and   Poland  has   remained  under  a   system  of   martial law,   administered  without  restraint  by   Russian  generals  and officials.

Return  to   Absolutism  in   Russia. - Alexander  II.  's   liberal  measures had   never   been   sincerely  accepted  by   the   officials,  accustomed as   they   were  to   carry  on  the   administration  without publicity  or  restraint.  The  Tsar  himself  had  hesitated,  and   the officials  had   used  every  opportunity  to   return  to   the   former  system. In   the   arrangements  for   the   emancipation  of   the   serfs  they had  fixed,   for   the   limit   of   the   lots   of   land   and   the   redemption  of the   nobles'  rights,   figures   disadvantageous  to   the   peasants;  and they   delayed  the   work  of   redemption.  In   1862  a   "   central  committee of   revolution  "   having   published  a  proclamation  against the  imperial  family,  and  numerous  incendiary  crimes  having startled  Petersburg,  the  government  closed  the  reading  clubs and  circulating  libraries  and  suspended  a  number  of   journals. It   arrested  Tschernyschewski,  a   democratic  writer,  author  of   the famous  novel  "What  is   to   be   done?"  and   condemned  him   to   fourteen years   of   hard   labour.  A   number  of   young   democrats  had

organized  Sunday-schools  for   the   instruction  of   poor  children; the   government  closed  them.

After  the   Polish  insurrection,  the   nationalist  party   began   to curse  European  institutions  and   to   declare  the   autocratic  system the   only   one  that   would  bring   about  Russian  unity.  When  the Moscow  assembly  begged  the   Tsar  to   grant  a   representative  constitution, Alexander  replied : "   The   right   of   initiative  belongs   to me  exclusively  and   is   united  inseparably  to   the   autocratic  power which  God  has  intrusted  to   me.  .  .   No   one   is   qualified  to   come before  me  with  requests  concerning  the  general  interests and  needs  of   the   state."  The   Zemstvos  attempted  to   busy   themselves with   local   affairs,   to   control  officials  and   even  to   express political   views.  But   the   government  distrusted  them,   permitting the   publication  of   their  deliberations  only   after  review  by   the governor,  forbidding  the   expression  of   political  views  and   suspending or   closing   their   sessions.  It   gave   the   governor  the power  to   suspend  all   their  decisions  when  he   judged   them  contrary to   the   welfare  of   the   state.  Thus  hampered,  the   zemstvo did   not   become  an   institution  of   self-government  as   had  been hoped,  but   remained  subject  to   the   officials.

The  judicial  reform  was  to   guarantee  subjects  against   despotism and   to   do   away -with   special   and   secret  tribunals.  But   on   the first   occasion  for   the   application  of   the   new  system  to   a   political crime,  the  government  flinched.  A   fanatic  named  Karakosof had  fired  upon   the   Tsar;   instead  of   sending   him   before  the   common court,   they   had   him   tried   secretly   before  a   special   commission, according   to   the   old   usage.   This   precedent  became  the custom;  in   political  cases  special   commissions  are  employed,  and they   judge   secretly  without  guarantee  for   the   accused.  This process  was  regulated  in   1871;   in   every  political  affair  the   minister of   justice   decided  whether  the   accused  should  be   tried  by   judicial procedure  before  a   jury   or   by   special   procedure  before  a secret  commission;  he   rarely   decided  in   favour  of   jury   trial. Persons  accused  of   political  offences  had  neither  publicity  nor guarantee.  They   were  seized  by   the   police   and   kept   in   prison   on suspicion  indefinitely,  in   prisons   like   those  of   the   eighteenth  century, dark,   damp,   fever-dens,  where  they   lay   at   the   mercy  of   their jailers.  Officials  could  even  dispense  with  judicial  formalities. Russian  law   did   not  guarantee  free  choice  of   a   dwelling  place, but   gave  officials  the   right   to   assign   a   residence  to   the   Tsar's  subjects in   any   part   of   the   Empire,   even   in   Siberia.  Russian  officials could  seize  and   transport  to   Siberia  by   administrative  means  per-

sons  of   forbidden  opinions,  sometimes  even  those  who  on  accusation had   been   tried  and   acquitted.  Transportation  was usually  effected  by   Kibitka,  springless  vans, - whence  arose  the popular  expression  "   Kibitka  justice/' - and  the   family   of   a   suspect often   knew   not   even  where  he   had   been   taken.*

Liberty  of   the   press  was  rendered  a   fallacy   in   both   capitals   by warnings  and  suspensions.  The  newspapers  could  publish  only what  the   officials  were  pleased   to   let   pass ; there  were  left   only   the official  political  organs  and   that   of   Katkoff,  leader  of   the   autocratic party,   the   Moscow  Gazette.

Education  matters  were  put   in   charge   of   a   new  Minister  of Education,  Count  Tolstoi,  an  absolutist  (not   to   be   confused  with Leo  Tolstoi,  also   a   count,  the   great   novelist,  of   liberal  and   evangelical opinions).  He   revolutionized  secondary  education,  suppressing the   sciences,  which  were  considered  revolutionary,  and substituting  the   ancient  languages.  In   the   universities  he   forbade students'  clubs,   and   when  they   held   an   indignation  meeting, treated  them  as   insurgents  (1869).  He   finally   appointed  special inspectors  to   watch  them.

The  Opposition  Parties. - The  gradual  return  to   the   absolutist system  was  a   bitter  disappointment  for   the   intelliguenzia.  The enthusiasm  of   the   first   years  of   the   reign   was   followed  by   a   profound discontent.  An   opposition  was  formed,  among  young men  in   particular,  which  little  by   little  became  revolutionary. This  evolution,  begun   in   1861,   may   be   divided  into   three  phases: the   critical  dissatisfaction  of   Liberals  about  1869,   the   socialist movement  until  1875,   and  finally   revolutionary  terrorism.

I.   In   the   years   following  the   reform  of   1861   the   malcontents were  chiefly  those  who  admired  European  institutions,  the liberal  aristocratic  nobles,  young  men,  and   democratic  humanitarian students.  They   would  have  wished  more  far-reaching reforms,  a   European  constitution,  a  representative  assembly (which  the   nobles  demanded  officially  in   a   number  of   provinces), complete  liberty  of   press  and   religion.  They   complained  that the   reform  decrees  were  not  applied.  The   discontent  was  at   first theoretical  and   vague,  a   sort  of   general   discouragement.  Then, when  the  reform  turned  out  a   failure,  the   cultivated  Russians, reflecting  on  the   social  conditions  of   their  country,  found  them

*   This   system  of   transportation  and  enforced  residence  by   administrative authority   is   described  by   Kennan,  the   American  journalist,  who   saw   it in   operation.  His   book,  "   Siberia,"  though  little  noticed  in   France,  has had  great   attention  in   the   United  States  and   Europe.

desperate  and   gave  up   hope.   They   did   not   form  an  active  party, and  the   secret  societies  had   been  paralyzed  by   the   prosecutions of   1862  to   1864;   they   contented  themselves  with  a   pessimistic criticism  of   society   in   general.  Natural  sciences  and   positivist and  materialist  philosophy  were  the   fashion  of   the   hour;   people dissected  frogs   and  read  Buckle,  Darwin,  and   Buchner.  Tourguenef  described  this  condition  of   mind  in   his   novel  "Fathers and  Children"  in   1862.  He  gave  these  cynical  pessimists  the name  of   nihilists.*  The  name  became  famous  all   over  Europe, and  it   is   still   used   as   a   term  of   reproach   for   the   Russian  revolutionists. The   malcontents  of   this   generation  were  addicted  to   a very   destructive  criticism,  scoffing  at   religion,  family   ties,   and government  ; but   they   attempted  little   in   the   way   of   action.  Karakosof's  attempt  against  the   Tsar  in   1866  made  a   great   impression; it   was  the   first   attempt   by   a   Russian.  The  government replied  with  a  rescript  against  these  dangerous  doctrines  that were  attacking  every  sacred  object,  destroying  the   foundations of   the   family   and   property,  obedience  to   the   law,   and   respect   for authority.  From  this  rescript  dates  the  definite  return  to  the absolutist  system.  The  malcontents  became  alarmed  and   fled   the country.

2.   In   foreign   countries  the   refugees  adopted  socialistic  ideas. These  ideas  began   to   enter  Russia  in   two   forms:  Marxist  socialism, represented  in   particular  by   Lavroff,  and  Proudhon's anarchy,  adopted  by   Bakounine.  But  Bakounine,  by   adapting Proudhon's  doctrine  to   Russian  ideas,   wished  to   transfer  the ownership  of   the   soil   to   the   commune  (mir)   and   declared  that   to prepare  the   way   for   revolution  the   people   must  be   roused  by   acts of   violence,  riots,  and  conspiracies.  A   revolutionist  named Netchajew  founded  a   society  directed  by   a   secret  committee,  and persuaded  the   members  that   Russia  was  full   of   societies  ready   for action.  His  heroes  were  the   national  brigands,  Razin  and  Pougatchef.  The  society  murdered  a  spy   in   1868,   and   was  discovered and   suppressed.  But   the   doctrines  continued  to   spread. Bakounine's  motto  was  "   to   go   among  the   people,"  which  meant to   mingle   with  the   people   and   excite  them  to   revolt.  Lavroff also   recommended  preparing  the   people   for   a   peaceful  economic revolution  by   educating  them.  A   proclamation  invited  the   intellignenzia  to   descend  among  the   people.  Several  groups  were formed,  composed  mainly  of   students  and  young  girls.  Then began   a   period   of   obscure  acts  of   self-devotion:  the   young  men

*The  word  itself  was  not  new,  having  been  used  in   France  before  1848,

became  day-labourers  or  peasants  in   order  to  mix  with  the people.  That  their  white  skin  might   not   betray   them  they   exposed their   faces   to   the   sun  and   blackened  their   hands  with   tar. They   talked  with  their  fellow  workmen,  secretly  printed  and   distributed propagandist  writings.  Tourguenef  describes  in   his novel  "   Virgin  Soils  "   this  new  generation  of   agitators,  so different  from  the   nihilists.  These  socialists  spread   over  several provinces;  but   having   neither  common  organization  nor  uniform tactics,  they   produced  no   important  results.  The  government, warned  in   1874   by   an   informer,  ordered  the   prosecution  of   770 persons;  265   suspects  were  held  in   prison   in   1875.   The  secret societies,  recognising  the   uselessness  of   peaceful  propagandism, sought  to   influence  the   peasants  by   announcing  a   more  equitable division  of   land.  There  were  several  local  riots  of   peasants  discontented at   having  received  too  small  a  portion  of   the   village land.  Arrests  and  political  prosecutions  continued,  that  of Odessa  in   1877   involving  193   accusations.  Political  prisoners complained  of   brutal  treatment  in   the   prisons.  In   1878,   a   young girl   named  Vera  Sassulitch  fired  on  the   chief  of   police,   who   was accused  of   having   had   prisoners  beaten;  her   case  was   brought before  a   jury   and   she   was  acquitted.

3.   The  movement  then  changed  its   character,  and  violent socialists  assumed  control.  'They   gave  up   the   propagation  of doctrine  and  even  the   preparations  for   social  revolution;  experience had   proved   that   propagandism  is   impossible  under  the   absolutist system   and   that   Russia  has   no  proletary  class   to   aid   a   revolution. The   malcontents  wished  first   to   destroy   the   absolutist system  and  force  the   government  to   grant  a   national  representation and   liberty   of   the   press  :   social   revolution  would  come  later. The  Russian  revolutionists  gave  up   social  agitation  provisionally in   order  to   return  to   the   former  program  of   the   Liberals;  they demanded  political  liberty.  But  they   employed  other  resources for  advancing  their  cause;  to  the  governmental  terror  they wished  to   oppose  a   revolutionary  terror.  In   May,   1878,   remnants of   the   secret  societies  of   Petersburg  and   Southern  Russia  met   in a   secret  society,   strongly  organized  at   Petersburg  under  a   directing committee,  which  ordered  and   prepared  attempts  against   the authorities.  Each  member  bound  himself  to  the  execution  of decrees.  The  party   had  a   very  small  membership,  formed  of   a number  of   obscure  young  men,  students,  workingmen,  and young  women,  but  strongly  organized  for   action,  with  secret printing  establishments,  laboratories,  and   money  which  they   pro-

cured  by   voluntary  gifts   or   by   terror.  It   began   with   the   murder of   several  spies.   It   then   attacked  the   officers  of   police   and   administration who   arrested  or  maltreated  people   of   the   party. The  chief  of   the   "   third   section  "   (the   political   police),   who   had maltreated  persons  under  arrest,  was  stabbed  in   broad  daylight. The  terrorists  were  fighting  a   duel   with   the   government.  From 1878   to  1882  there  were  6   attempts  against  high   officials,  4 against  chiefs  of   police,   and   9   spies   were   killed;   31   revolutionists were  executed,  8   died  in   prison,   and   3   committed  suicide.  The Tsar  called  on   Russian  society   for   aid   against   the   "   revolutionary band  "   in   August,  1878.   Certain  Zemstvos  answered  this   appeal by   pointing  out  the   vices  of   the   administration  and   begging  the Tsar  to   grant   his   subjects   "   the   same  liberties  as   he   had   gained for   the   Bulgarians."

The  Terrorists  decided  to   kill   the   Tsar.  Four  attempts  were made  against  him:  a   shot,   a   mine  under  the   railroad  over  which the   imperial  train  was  to   pass,  an  explosion  of   dynamite  in   the Winter  Palace,  finally   bombs  thrown  against  his   carriage  in March,  1881.  To  oppose  the  Terrorists,  Alexander  in   1879 divided  the   country  between  6   governors-general  invested  with discretionary  powers.  In   1880  he   established  a   commission  for the   preservation  of   order  in   the   state,   whose  head,   Loris  Melikoff, enjoyed  a   sort  of   dictatorship.  Loris  Melikoff  tried  to   win   the good   opinion  of   the   Liberals  by   pardoning  condemned  persons, ordering  an   investigation  of   the   prisons,  and   forbidding  the   governors to   sentence  to   transportation  by   administrative  order. Alexander  seemed  ready   to  restore  the   liberal  system;  he   dismissed Count   Tolstoi,   suppressed  the   third  section,  and   was about  to   sign   a   project   for   the   creation  of   deliberative  assemblies, when   he   was  assassinated.  The   Terrorist  executive  committee announced  that   the   death  sentence  pronounced  upon  the Tsar,   on   September  9,   1879,   had   just   been   carried  out,   and   called on   his   successor,  Alexander  III.,   to   give   Russia  a   liberal  system.

Alexander  III.'s  Reign. - Alexander  did  not  dismiss  Loris Melikoff  at   once.  He   even  seemed  to   approve  the   creation  of   a reform  committee.  But  he   was  not,   like   his   father,   in   sympathy with  Europe;  he   was,   like  Nicholas,  a   Russian,  an   Orthodox, and   an  enemy  to   Western  ideas.  He   first   chose  councillors  from among  those  who  hated  the   West:  Katkoff,  the  head  of   the nationalist  party,   Pobiedonostsef,  proctor  of   the   Holy   Synod   of the   Russian  Church,  and   General  Ignatieff.  He   announced  his "   faith   in   the   strength   and   truth  of   autocratic  power,"  said   he

was   "   called  to   strengthen  and   defend  the   nation's  welfare  against attack"  (manifesto  of   May   n).   And  in   truth  Alexander  III. maintained  throughout  his   reign   the   autocratic  system  of   his grandfather  Nicholas.  But,   unlike  Nicholas,  he   preserved  peace with  other  nations.  Ignatieff,  who  favoured  an  aggressive  policy in   Europe,  was   dismissed  in   1882.  The   Tsar  retained  only   the absolutists,  Katkoff  and   Pobiedonostsef;  he   recalled  Count  Tolstoi, who   had   made   himself  so   famous  by   his   struggle  against modern  science.  As   soon  as   Alexander  III.  declared  his   autocratic intentions,  the   Terrorists  reopened  their  campaign.  They prepared  an  attack  for   the   coronation  day   at   Moscow,  but   the police   discovered  it.   The  Terrorists  were  few  in   number  and were  finally   exterminated  about  1884.  Since  then  we   have  read in   foreign   papers  that   the   police   continue  to   guard   the   Tsar,   and that   there  have  been  several  unsuccessful  attempts  and  arrests, some,  it   is   said,   among  the   army  officers;  but   we   do   not   know whether  the   revolutionary  party   is   still   organized;  the   government, if   it   knows,  keeps   silence.

The  Russian  government  restored  the   system  of   Nicholas  I. and  laboured  to   destroy  the   work  of   Alexander  II.  It   kept   a sharp   eye   on  all   institutions  through   which  there  was   danger   of European  ideas  entering  Russia - the   press,  the   schools  and   colleges, and   the   local   assemblies.  The   censorship  of   country  papers was  so  applied   as   to   prevent  the   publication  not  only   of   criticisms, but   even  of   information  disagreeable  to   officials,  such  as   fires, robberies,  and  deaths.  As   for   the   papers  in   the   capitals,  the system  of   warnings  reduced  them  to   hardly  more  than  official organs.  The  organs  of   the  autocratic  party  alone  were  permitted freedom  of   speech,   so   that   to   the   outside  world  Russian opinion  seemed  represented  by   Katkoff,  the   enemy  of   the   West and  especially  of   republican  France.

A   special   censorship  examined  foreign   books  and   newspapers, either  excluding  them  or  permitting  their  entrance  only   after striking  out  passages  considered  dangerous  for   Russian  readers. This  operation,  performed  with  an  ink-covered  roller,  was familiarly  known  as   "   Knocking  out  the   caviar."

The  government  tried  to   develop  religious  education  by   creating primary   schools,  directed  by   the   popes.   It   also   tried  to exterminate  the   dissenting  religions  of   the   west  by   converting  to Orthodoxy  the   Lutheran  peasants  of   the   Baltic  provinces  and   the Catholic  peasants  of   Poland.  It   persecuted  the   religious  sect  of Stundists.

39

In   the   universities  a  number  of   liberal  professors  were  dismissed or   silenced,   and   the   students,  always   suspected  of   revolutionary ideas,   were  subjected  to   continual  supervision,  which seems  to   have  provoked  frequent  trouble,  from  1884   to   1890.   In Russia,  the   universities  are,  as   in   Europe  during  the   Middle Ages,   frequented  chiefly   by   poor  young  men,  sons  of   popes,   lower officials,  and   small  Jewish   merchants.  This  intellectual  proletariat disturbed  the   government.  The   report  of   the   conspiracy of   1887   showed,  among  the  compromised,  the   names  of   professors and   students  of   the   lower  classes.  A   circular  was   issued forbidding  secondary  schools  and  universities  to   receive  the   children of   workingmen  and  domestic  servants.

The  elective  justices   of   the   peace,  established  by   Alexander  II., were  suppressed.  In   the   rural  districts  they   were  replaced  in 1889   by   new  officials,  chiefs  of   the   canton,  appointed  by   the   government exclusively  from  the   nobility.  These  officials  were charged  not  only   with  the   administration  of   justice,   but   with   the appointment  and  dismissal  of   the   chiefs  of   the   villages,  and   with the   supervision  of   the   village   councils.  The   peasants  were  thus made  subject   to   the   nobles.

No   opposition  could  now  be   made  by   lawful  methods;  but   the foreign  papers  often  announced  the  discovery  of   plots,   secret printing  houses,  and  political  societies;  they   reproduced  proclamations issued   by   the   revolutionists,  petitions  to   the   Tsar  pointing out   abuses  of   power   by   officials,  and   protests  against   the treatment  given   to   political  convicts.

Alexander  III.'s  reign   was  a   period   of   economic  transformation. Financial  embarrassment  had   followed  the   war  of   1877, the   settlement  of   claims  under  the   emancipation  of   the   serfs,   and the   grain   famine.  The  budget  showed  great   deficits;  the   paper money,  excessive  issues  of   which  caused  the   gold   to   be   sent abroad,  had  fallen  to   one-half  of   its   face   value.  The   acknowledged deficit   lasted   until   1887,   when   a   new   Minister  of   Finance, Vichnegradzky,  a   protege  of   Katkoff,  turned  the   deficit  into  a surplus.  He   set  up   against  the   German  industries  a   protective tariff   that   was  almost  prohibitive,  He   paid   the   Russian  debt, placed   partly   in   Germany,  by   means  of   a   series  of   new   loans  made in   France  beginning  with  1888;   the   total  of   the   French  capital lent   to   the   Russian  government  was  estimated  at   one  or  one  and a   half   billion   dollars.  According  to   official  statistics  the   revenues of   the   government  increased  between  1881  and  1891   from  650,-

000,000  to   891,000,000  rubles,  railroad  traffic  from  42,000,000 tons  in   1885   to   67,000,000  in   1890.

Russification. - The  attempt  at  enforced  Russification  of   the western  provinces  had  begun  under  Nicholas  I.   Alexander  II. at   first   confined  himself  to   the   Polish  provinces  which  threatened to   form  an   independent  nation;  he   seemed  to   have  decided to   respect  the   language  and   religion  of   the   peoples   that   asked only   for   self-government.  He   put   a  stop   to   Nicholas'  project of   Russification  in   the   Baltic  provinces.  In   Finland  he   convoked in   1863,   for   the   first   time   since  the   conquest,  the   Diet   of the   four   estates,   in   order   to   vote  a   new  tax   system.  They   spoke four   languages,  the   Russian  governor  in   Russian,  the   nobles  and clergy   in   French,  the   middle  class  in   Swedish,  the   peasants  in Finnish.  But  the   Slavic  party,  which  had  become  supreme, finally   entangled  the   Tsar  in   the   struggle  against   foreign   languages and   religions.*  As   early   as  1867   the   Baltic  provinces were  ordered  to   enforce  the   Ukase  of   1850,   making  Russian  compulsory. The   assemblies  of   the   three   provinces  protested,  invoking the   Tsars'  promise   to   maintain  their  rights,   including  "   the use  of   German  in   government  and   city   offices  and   in   the   courts." The  government  replied  that  the   Tsars,  while  confirming  the rights   of   the   Baltic  provinces,  added  the   clause  "   in   so   far   as   they are  consistent  with  the   general   institutions  and   laws  of   our   Empire," and   that   the   use  of   a   separate   language   was  contrary  to the  "   principles  of   unity "   (1867-70).  In   reality   the   measure was  not  enforced. ing

Under  Alexander  III.  the   government  once  more  attempted Russification.  In   1885   the   three  Baltic  governments  were  ordered to   write  their   communications  in   Russian.  The  city   councils  of Riga   and   Revel  refused,  and   were  prosecuted.  The  secondary schools  were  ordered  to   give   Russian  the   first   place   in   education. The  postal   system   demanded  addresses  in   Russian.  At   the   same time  measures  were  resumed  against  the  Lutheran  religion. Children  born  of   a   mixed  marriage  must  be   brought  up   in   the Orthodox  Church.  Lutheran  peasants,  who  had  been  converted to   Orthodoxy  by   the   promises  of   the   government  and   wished  to return  to   their  primitive  religion,  were  arrested,  and   the   pastors

*The  persecution  was  extended  to  the  Russian  dialects.  A   popular literature  in   Lesser-Russian  dialect  had  been  built  up   in   the   Ukraine. The  Russian  Government  in   1876   forbade  the  printing  of   any  original work  in   Lesser-Russian,  also  the   acting,  reciting,  or  singing  of   any  piece in   that   dialect.

who  had  performed  a   religious  act   for   them  were  prosecuted  for attempting  to   convert  an   Orthodox  believer.  To   the   protests  of the   Lutheran  clergy   Pobiedonostsef  replied:  "   Russia's  first   duty is   to   protect   the   Orthodox  faith   against   inward  doubts  and   outward attacks.  .   .   The   religions   of   the   West   have   not   yet   given up   attacking  the   integrity  of   the   Empire.  Russia  cannot  let them  tempt   her   Orthodox  sons."  Radical  measures  were  taken at   length:   orders  were  given   in   1889   to   the   German  schools  to adopt   the   Russian  language,  orders  to   replace   German  with  Russian on   signboards,  and   to   use   Russian  alone  in   all   public   business. Russian  judges   replaced   the   German  judges.  The  University of   Dorpat,  the   centre  of   intellectual  activity   in   the   Baltic provinces,  was  Russianized.  In   1890   it   received  orders  to   conduct its   courses  in   Russian.

Meanwhile  the   government  was  endeavouring  to   drive  out  the Jews.  These  numbered  about  5,000,000,  mainly  in   the   western provinces,  the   former  Kingdom  of   Poland.  They   had   preserved not  only   their   religion,   which  was  still   very   formal,  but   also   their costume,  customs,  and  language - the   latter  a   German  jargon full   of   Hebraisms.  First  they   were  forbidden  to   enter  the   liquor trade  or   to   acquire   land   (1882).  The   people,   excited  against   the Jews,   plundered  and   burned  their   houses.  To   keep   the   Jews   out of   the   liberal  professions,  a   limit   was  set   to   the   number  of   Israelites who   could  be   admitted  to   the   secondary  schools  and   universities, reducing   the   number  from   10   per   cent,  of   the   whole  to 3   per   cent.  In   1890   a   general   measure  was  adopted.  All   Jews remaining  in   the   interior  of   Russia  were  to  emigrate  to   the western  provinces,  and  in   the   districts  where  they   were  concentrated they   were  forbidden  to   own  or   lease  lands,   and   were   forced to   remain  in   the   cities,   where  all   the   liberal  professions  were  closed to   them.  In   1891   the   Jewish   workmen  of   Moscow  were  arrested and   taken   away   by   soldiers.  There  were  peasant  outbreaks against   the   Jews,   and   some  300,000   Jews   left   the   country. breaks

The  Grand  Duchy  of   Finland  was  the   last   country  reached  by Russification.  Alexander  II.   'had  continued  to  convoke  the Diet  every   five   years,   Alexander  III.   every  three  years.  The Diet  came  into   conflict  with   the   government  over  the   law   establishing the   censorship  of   the   press.   The   Diet   refused  to   pass   it and   the   government  imposed  it   by   administrative  means,  in   1867, in   connection  wkh  certain  changes  relating  to  the   schools  and the   revenue.

But   Finland  retained  her   Swedish  administration  and   reorgan-

ized   her   bank   in   1867,   her   courts  in   1868,   her   church  in   1869,   her railroads  and   her   schools  in   1872,   her   communal  system   in   1873, her   militia  in   1878,   her   law   of   civil   rights   and   her   poor  relief.  A Finnish  party  was  formed,  which  gained  from  the  government the  establishment  of   Finnish  as  an  official  language,  on  an equality  with  Swedish.  In   1890   Finland's  economic  home  rule, in   relation  to   money,  customs,  and   transportation,  seemed  to   be threatened;  a  plan   was  also  made  to   reform  the   Finnish  penal code  on   the   Russian  model.  The   Diet  of   1891   protested  against this   policy,   and   the   Tsar   left   to   Finland  her   self-government.

The  principal  undertaking  seems  to   have  been  the   series  of financial  operations  designed  to   procure  for   Russia  the   quantity of   gold   necessary  for   restoring  the   value  of   the   ruble.  The   only domestic  event  has  been  the   coronation  ceremony  at   Moscow in   1896,   in   which  several  thousand  bystanders  were  crushed, through  the   negligence  of   the   police.  The   masses  in   memory  of the   victims  of   this   catastrophe  were  made  the   occasion  of   a   great demonstration  by   the   students  in   Moscow.  This  was  followed by   repressive  measures.  The  report  to   the   government  on  this incident  seems  to   indicate  an  extensive  liberal  movement.

Tsar  Nicholas  II.- The  death  of   Alexander  III.   in   November, 1894,   made  no  change  in   Russia's  domestic  system.  His  son Nicholas  II.   has   several  times  declared  his   desire  to   continue  his father's  policy.  He   said   to   the   delegates  from  the   nobility  and cities,   in   January,  1895:   "   Let   it   be   known  that   I   shall   maintain the   autocratic  system  as   firmly   as  my   immortal  father."  He considered  it   an   "   absurd  dream  "   that   the   "   Zemstvos  could  take part   in   affairs  of   state."  A   petition   from  writers  and   journalists for   the   amelioration  of   the   press   laws  was  rejected.  Pobiedonostsef  remains  at   the   head  of   the   government,  in   full   possession of   his   influence,  and   it   is   said   that   the   decisive  argument in   the   administration  of   affairs  is  : "   This   is   how   it   was   done   in   the time  of   the   late   Tsar."

In   spite   of   the   official  declarations  and   the   acts  of   the   government, there   is   a   general   impression  that   the   system   is   nearing   a change.  The  Tsarina,  who  hitherto  has   taken  no  part   in   public affairs,  is   a   German  princess   accustomed  to   Western  life,   and   the purposes  which  are  attributed  to  the   Tsar  himself  indicate  that he   does  not   believe  the   autocratic  system   likely   to   be   a   lasting one.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.- A   selected  bibliography  will  be   found  in   Rambaud, "   Hist,   de   la   Russie,"  1894   edit.

PRINCIPAL  WORKS.- COMPLETE  HISTORIES  :   The  only   good   one  is Bernhardy,  "Gesch.  Russlands  u.   der  Europaeischen  Politik,"  4   vols.,  1863 ("   Staatengesch.  d.   n.   Z."),   stops   at   1831.- Crenange,  "   Hist,  de   la   Russie jusqu'a  Nos  Jours,"  1896   edit.,  a  summary  popular  edition,  hardly  worth while  except  for   Poland.

DOCUMENTS.*- The  principal  official  documents  and  the  history  of events  in   the  annuals  of   the  three  languages  :   "   Annual  Register," "Annuaire  de   Lesur,"  and  later,  "Annuaire  des  Deux  Mondes,"  "Geschichtskalender  "   since  1860.

EPISODES:  Important  information  in  anonymous  but  well-compiled works:  "Von  Nicholas  I.   zu   Alexander  III."  (1881),  on  the  affairs  of 1848;   "Ausder  Petersburger  Gesellschaft,"  1882;  "   Russische  Wandlungen,"  1882,  on  the   reign   of   Alexander  II.- On   Nicholas  II.,   Fr.   Schutz, "   Das   Heutige  Russland,"  1897.

DESCRIPTIONS  OF   RUSSIA  :   These  works,  giving  much  instructive  about Russia,  where  custom  holds  a   more  important  place   in   political  life   than events,  may   be   classified  into  three  periods:

1.   Period  of   Nicholas  I. :   Nic.   Turguenieff  (not   to   be   confused  with   the celebrated  novelist,  Ivan  Tourguenef),  "   La   Russie  et   les   Russes,"  3   vols., 1847,   the   work  of   a   Russian. - Schnitzler,  "   L'Empire  des   Tsars,"  4   vols., 1862-69,  officious.- Haxthausen,  "   Etude  sur  les   Institutions  Nationales  de la   Russie,"  trans,  from  the   Germ.,  3   vols.,   1847-53,  famous  for   the   description of   the   Russian  Mir.
2.   Liberal  period  of   Alexander  II.:   Wallace,  "Russia,"  2   vols.,   1879, trans,  into  Fr.,   observations  of   an   Englishman  on   the   working  of   the   new institutions. - Anat.  Leroy-Beaulieu,  "   L'Empire  des   Tsars,"  3   vols.,  1881-89.
3.   Period  of   Reaction:  Tikhomirov,  "   Russie  Politique  et   Sociale,"  1886  ; rich   in   facts,   the   work  of   a   revolutionist,  later  converted. - Stepniak,  "   La Russie  Souterraine,"  1885,  "   La   Russie  sous  les   Tsars,"  2   vols.,   1885,   "   The Russian  Peasantry,"  1888;  the   author,  whose  real  name  was  Kraftchewsky, was  an  exiled  revolutionist.     The  most  instructive  romances  on   Russian life   are   Gogol's   "   Dead  Souls  "   and   Tourguenef s   novels  already  mentioned.

ON  THE  REVOLUTIONARY  MOVEMENT:  A. Than,  "Gesch.  der  Revolutionaren  Bewegungen  in   Russland,"  1883,   intelligent  and  well  informed, with  a   good   bibliography. - Oldenberg,  "   Der  Russische  Nihilismus,"  1888; for  the  end.- Bibl.  in  "   Handworterbuch  der  Staatswissenschaften  " (Anarchismus,  Sozialismus),  1890-93.

*   Being   unacquainted  with  Russian,  I   do   not  quote  the   Russian  documents, but   confine  myself   to   French,  German,  and  English  works;  and further,  mentioning  only   the   chief  of   those,  those  which  suffice  for   knowledge of   the   facts,   and   which  give   references  to   incidental  writings  and monographs.  I   omit  the  literature  of   Polish  martyrdom,  the  political writings  of   revolutionists,  polemic  pamphlets  and  works  (Herzen,  Dolgoroukov,  I.   Golovine).

ON  THE  PEASANT  EMANCIPATION:  Anat,  Leroy-Beaulieu,  "   Un  Homme d'Etat  Russe,"  1884;  study   of   Miliutine  and  the  drafting  of   the  emancipation project. - Keussler,  "Zur  Gesch.  u.   Kritik  des   Bauerlichen  Grundbesitzes  in   Russland,"  3   vols.,   1876-82;  the   chief  study   of   the   whole,   refers to   previous  works.

ON  RUSSIFICATION  :   J.   v.   Dorneth,  "Die  Russificierung  der   Ostseeprovinzen,"  1887,   and   a   well-prepared  anonymous  work,   "   Deutschprotestantische Kampfe  in   den  Baltischen  Provinzen  Russlands,"  1888,  both  from  the German  standpoint. - For  the  persecution  of   the  Jews,   the  publication "   Darkest  Russia,"  and  Frederic,  "   The  New  Exodus,"  1892.

ON   TRANSPORTATION  TO  SIBERIA:  G.   Zennan,  "   Siberia  and   the   Exile  System," new  edit.,   2   vols   ,   1891   (partially  trans,  into   Fr.),   the   story   of   an American  eyewitness.

ON  INSTITUTIONS:  Engelmann,  "   Staatsrecht  d.   K.  Russland,"  1889 (Marquardsen  coll.),  description  of   official  institutions  ;   bibliog.- -Lehr, "Legislation  Ppnale  de   la   Russie,"  1879. - DeClercq,  "   Les  Finances  de 1'Emp.  de   Russie,"  1886.

ON  FINLAND:  Schybergson,  "Gesch.  Finnlands,"  1896,  tr.   from  the Swedish  (Gotha  coll.),   goes  a3   far   as  1894,   good   for   official  facts. - Mechelin, "Staatsrecht  Finnlands,"  1889   (Marquardsen  coll.);  "Precis  du  Droit Public  de   Finlande,"  1886.

ON  POLAND:  Bibliog.  of   works  in   French  in   Lorenz,  "   Catal.  de   la   Libr. Fr."  (analyt.  tables,  vols.  viii.  and  xi.). - Chodsko,  "   Hist.  Popul.   de   la Pologne,"  i4th   ed.,   1864. - Lisicki,  "   Le   Marquis  Wielopolski,"  2   vols.,   1880, Polish  Conservative,  very  well  informed  on   the   revolution  of   1863.- Batsch, "   La   Russie  Lithuanienne,"  1869,   for  the  insurrection  of   1863. - Leliw "   Russie  et   Pologne,"  1896,   for   the   existing  conditions  of   Poland.

## CHAPTER  XX.

## THE   OTTOMAN    EMPIRE.*

The  Ottoman  Empire  in   1814. - The  Ottoman  Empire,  founded of   old   by   the   family   of   Ottoman  Sultans,  whose  name  it   bears, was  an  absolute  military  monarchy,  established  in   Asia,  and extended  by   conquest  through  a  whole  region   of   Europe.

Its   territory,  even  after  the   losses  of   the   eighteenth  century, was  still   very   large ; it   comprised  the   whole  of   Asia  Minor,  as   far as   Persia,   Syria,   Egypt;   and   in   Europe   the   whole  of   the   Balkan Peninsula  as   far   as   Austria  and   Russia.  But   its   government  remained an   Oriental,  Mussulman  despotism,  which  estranged  it more  and   more  from  Christian  Europe,  where  the   liberal  form  of government  was  steadily  gaining  ground.  The  Ottoman  government also   has   lived   through   this   century   in   a   constant  alternation of   crises  and   attempts  at   reform.

Like  all   despotic  Oriental  states,  the   Empire   had   no   institution working  according  to   law.  The  central  government  was  in   the hands  of   a   confused  combination  of   the   personal  will   of   the   Sultan or   his   favourites,  orders  from  his   lieutenant,  the   Grand  Vizier, and   decisions  from  the   Divan,   a   council  of   high   dignitaries.  The army  was  mainly  composed  of   janissaries,  stationed  in   or  about Constantinople.  These  were  hereditary  soldiers,  who  were  poor fighters,   lacking   in   discipline,  and   even  at   times  revolting  against their  master  (they   had   already  deposed  two  Sultans,  1807-08). Finances  were  but   rudely   organized,  without  a   budget   (the   Sultan drew  from  the   treasury  at   will).   There  was  neither  ledger   nor audit:  the   papers  were  kept   in   sacks.  There  was  no  regular assessment  nor  systematic  collection  of   taxes.  The  poll-tax

*   This   chapter   is   short  ;   the  Asiatic  provinces  are  outside  the   field  of   a history  of   Europe;  the  interference  of   European  powers  in   the  Eastern question  is   treated  in   the   chapters  on   inter-state  relations.  The  history of   the   independence  of   the   Balkan  Christians  it   has  seemed  to   me   best  to put   in   the   chapter  upon   those  peoples.  There  remains  here,  therefore, only   the   history  of   the   government  of   the   Sultans  in   Europe,  and  their attempts  at   reform.

(Kharadj)  upon  all   male  subjects  who  were  not   Mussulmans,  the rents  on  the  domain,  and  the  taxes  on  transportation  were farmed  out  to   undertakers  who  exacted  more  than  their  due. Provincial  administration  was  not  much  more  than  authorized extortion;  the   governors  took  the   province  at   auction,  and  the officials,   receiving  no  pay,   besides  being   left   without  supervision, oppressed  and  tyrannized  over  the   inhabitants.

Being  a   Mussulman  government,  the  Empire  encountered special  difficulties  in   Europe.  The  Sultan  was  Caliph,  Commander of   the   Faithful;  the   Koran  was  the   law  - not  only   religious law,   but   civil   and   political   as   well  - for   all   Mussulmans. It   confused  the   Church  and   state,  allowing  the   Church  to   make the   laws  of   the   state.  The   civil   power   forbade  all   Mussulmans, under  pain   of   death,   to   be   converted  to   any   other  religion.  The real   Ottoman  people  comprised  only   Mussulmans.  It   was  not a   nation  in   the   ethnological  sense,  not  even  a  group  united  by common  language  or  customs  like  the   nations  of   Europe.  The nationalities  that  went  over  to   Islam  were  admitted  to   equality with  their  conquerers,  even  when  they   retained  their  own  language and   national  dress.  The  popular  expressions,  Turkey, Turkish  Empire,  are  accurate  neither  politically,  for   all   Mussulmans are   Ottomans,  nor  ethnographically,  for   in   European  Turkey, except  about  Constantinople,  the   Mussulman  population  is   not Turkish.  (Even  in   Asiatic  Turkey  it   is   a   mixture  of   Turks  and converted  peoples,  Armenians,  Greeks,  and   Syrians.)  There  are Croats  in   Bosnia,  Albanians  in   Epirus,  Bulgarians  (Pomaks)  in Macedonia,  and  Greeks  in   the   islands.  Among  all   these  Mussulmans the   government  made  no   distinction  either  in   theory   or in   practice,   rank   and   office  being   open   to   all   alike.  The   Mussulman Empire   was  a   truly   democratic  monarchy.

But  as   the   Mussulmans,  unlike  the   Christians  of   the   Middle Ages,   tolerated  non-Mussulmans  merely  as  social  inferiors,  the population  in   almost  all   the   European  provinces  found  itself   composed of   two  layers,   one  placed   over  the   other.  The   old   inhabitants, who   were  still   Christians  and   had   become  ra'ias   (flocks), strangers  in   the   Ottoman  state,  could  not,   in   principle,  either enter  the   army  or  any   office.  The  government  tolerated  them, but  shut  them  out  from  political  life   and   made  money  out  of them  by   means  of   the   Kharadj.  The  Mussulmans  formed  a democracy  among  themselves,  but  an  aristocracy  with  regard   to the   raias.  Ottoman  society,  democratic  by   its   social  system,   had become  aristocratic  by   its   religion.  It   comprised  two  classes.

one  excluded  from  political  rights,   the   other  in   exclusive  possession of   the   power,  classes  which  were  necessarily  unequal  and hostile  to   each  other  and   unable  to   blend,   because  separated  by religious  hatred.  Political  inequality  had  produced  social  inequality; everywhere   the   Mussulman:  were  property  holders  and lords,   the   Christians  tenants  and  subjects.

The  Christians,  in   order  to   defend  themselves  against   the   Mussulmans, had   secured  from   the   Sultans  promises  of   guarantees for   their  religion,  that   is   to   say,   for   their   clergy   and   churches. Each  Christian  society  (and   the   Jews   as  well)   had   formed  a   religious community  of   sufficiently  strong  construction  to   become an  actual  administrative  district.  The  Ottoman  government favoured  this   organization  as   facilitating  communication  with  its subjects.  In   every  community  the   leaders  of   the   clergy,   patriarch, metropolitans,  bishops,*  official  representatives  of   their flocks  and   responsible  to   the   government,  had   become  the   civil authorities,  who  judged,  governed,  and  in   some  cases  tyrannized over  their  followers.

In   behalf  of   foreign   Christians  who  had   come  from  Europe, a   number  of   states  had   at   first   secured  the   appointment  of   consuls as   the   political   heads  of   their   nationalities.  Then  the   Sultan  had allowed  the   protection  of   foreign   consuls  to   be   extended  to   a   part of   his   Christian  subjects.  France  had   acquired  the   official  right of   protecting  Catholics  (who   were  especially  numerous  in   Asia), Russia  secured  the   right   of   protecting  Orthodox  worshippers, which  included  nearly  all   the   Christians  in   European  Turkey. Thus  two  European  governments  were  enabled  to   interfere  in the   internal  affairs  of   the   Empire.

The  Sultan,  being   a   Mussulman,  could  not   join   the   Christian sovereigns  of   Europe;  his   states  remained  outside  of   Christian international  law;   he   had   forced  his   entrance  as  an   intruder  and ran  the   risk   of   being   expelled   by   force.

The  Empire  was  thus  not  only   weakened  by   the   lack   of   organization of   its   military   forces,   but   its   weakness  extended  especially to   its   religious  constitution.  It   governed,  not  a  nation,  but   a group  of   nations,  superposed  and  irreconcilable,  the   majority hostile  to   the   very   principle  of   the   state,   the   Mussulman  religion. The   Christians,  the   natural  enemies  of   the   state,   remained  organized in   national  bodies,  ready   for   revolt;  they   were  officially  pro-

*In   the   ancient  Byzantine  Empire,  where  each  city   had  its   bishop,  the Metropolitan,  whose  title  corresponds  to   that  of   archbishop  in   the   West, had  only   a   small  province.

tected  by   a   great   European  government  which  was   hostile  to   the Empire,  and  free  from  the   restraints  of   international  law.

The  Empire,  threatened  in   the  eighteenth  century  by   the Austro-Russian  coalition,  which  had  already  arranged  to   divide it   between  them,   was  saved  by   the   wars  between  the   European powers,  which  diverted  the   attention  of   its   Western  enemies,  and, by   the   establishment  of   the   English  in   India,   which  gave   England a   direct  interest  in   shutting  out  the   other  powers   from  the road  to   India.  In   addition  to   France,  his   old   ally,   the   Sultan could  count  on   defence  from  England,  which  had   become  his   ally during  the   Egyptian  campaign;  Austria,  his   former  enemy,  was now  busied  with  Italy   and  Germany.  Russia  alone  remained hostile,  and  yet   she   had  abandoned  the  Empress  Catherine's dream  of   conquering  and  dismembering  Turkey.

Crisis  of   the   Greek  Insurrection  (1820-27). - When  peace  was restored  in   Europe,  the   Eastern  question  (as   it   was  now  called) began   to   be   discussed  :   What  is   to   become  of   the   Ottoman  Empire? 'The   question   was  subdivided  into   two:  I.   Will   the   Empire be   maintained  or   dismembered?  2.   Are  the   Sultan's  Christian subjects  to   remain  ra'ias  or   be   organized  as  a   nation?  Of   these two  questions  the   diplomatists,  accustomed  to   consider  only   the sovereigns,  seemed  to  perceive  the  first  alone.  The  second slowly  commanded  attention  in   spite   of   the   diplomatists.  The Greeks  and  Servians  had  already  urged   it   on  the   Congress  of Vienna,  by   demanding  a   national  administration;  their  petitions had  been  rejected.

The  Ottoman  Empire,  since  1814,   has   lived  in   almost  constant agitation,  insurrections  by   the   subjects,  revolts  of   the   pashas, invasions,  negotiations  with  the   European  powers,  not  to   mention intrigues   in   the   seraglio.  'The   first   great   crisis  was  produced by   the   Greek  insurrection  (1820).  But,   as  there  were Greeks  scattered  all   over  the   Empire,  they   did   not  at   first   know distinctly  in   what  part   they   should  begin   the   revolt,  and   they made  the  attempt  simultaneously  in   Epirus,  Roumania,  and Greece  (see   p.   650).

In   Roumania  the   uprising  was  the   work  of   a   secret  society, an   hetairia,  founded  at   Odessa,  following  out  the   rites   prescribed by   the   secret  societies  of   the   period,   with   secret  leaders,  several degrees  of   initiation,  a   cipher,   and   a   symbolic  black  flag   bearing a   phcenix;  they   talked  of   restoring  the   Greek  Empire   by   the   aid of   Tsar   Alexander.  The  leaders  had   decided  to   stir   up   revolt  in Morea;  but   Ypsilanti,  who  had  friends  in   Moldavia,  preferred  to

issue  his   proclamation  at   Jassy.*  The  Roumans  were  little  interested in   a   Greek  rebellion;  they   left   Ypsilanti  alone  with  his "sacred  battalion/'  which  was  driven  into  Austria  (1821). Karavias  surprised  the   city   of   Galatz,  pillaged  the   mosques,  massacred the   garrison  and   the   Mussulmans.

In   the   Greek  countries  the   revolt  was  general  and  accompanied by   massacres  (see 'p.   651).  It   excited  such  sharp   irritation among  the   Mussulmans  that  the   Sultan  had  the  Greek patriarch  hanged,  together  with  three  archbishops  in   their priestly  robes,   at   the   gate   of   the   Greek  Church,  on   Easter  Sunday. Then,   the   Greeks  of   Samos  having   tried  to   incite  revolt  in Chios,  the   Turks  sent  an  expedition  to   the   latter  island.  They promised  an  amnesty,  but  massacred  or  enslaved  that  peaceful people f   (1823).  This  execution  and  massacre  prejudiced  Europe against  the   Turks.  The  powers  were,  however,  slow  in   beginning their   intervention. tion

The  Sultan  asked  help   from  the   pasha   of   Egypt,   Mehemet-Ali. who  was  officially  his   subject,   and   who  sent  him   an  army  under his   own  son   Ibrahim.  Greece  was  invaded  and  conquered,  but saved  by   the   intervention  of   the   European  powers,  who   sent  their fleets  to   Morea  (1827)   to   enforce  the   departure  of   Ibrahim,  and especially  by   the   Russian  invasion  of   the   Ottoman  Empire   (182829).   The   entrance  of   the   Russian  army   into   Adrianople  decided the   Sultan  to   ask   for   peace.   He   recognised  the   independence  of the   new   kingdom  of   Greece  (1829).  Since  1820  he   had  allowed a   Servian  Christian,  Miloch,  to   become  hereditary  prince  of   the Servians  in   the   province  of   Belgrade  (see   p.   658).   This  was  the first   break  in   the   Ottoman  Empire.

In   order  to   make  peace  with  the   Tsar  (September,  1829)   me Sultan  promised  to   open   to   foreign   commerce  the   straits  which gave  access  to   the   Black  Sea   (Bosporus  and  Dardanelles);  he undertook  to   destroy  all   his   fortifications  on  the   left   bank  of   the Danube,  which  meant  the   military  abandonment  of   the   whole  of Roumania;  he   promised  to   reimburse  Russia  for   its   expenses  in

*   This   proclamation  is   full   of   classic  references:  "   Let   us  place   ourselves between  Marathon  and  Thermopylae.  .  .   The  blood  of   tyrants  will  be   an agreeable  expiation  to   the   souls  of   Epaminondas,  Thras}rbulus,  Miltiades, and  Leonidas.  The  Turks,  these  effeminate  descendants  of   Darius  and Xerxes,  will   be   much  easier  to   conquer  than  the   Persians  of   old   times."
- f I   pass   rapidly   over  these  events,  which  though  highly   picturesque  and dramatic,  and   celebrated  by   the   greatest  poets   of   the   century,  are  of   little political  importance.  On   the   independence  of   Greece,  see  p.   652;   on   the intervention  of   Europe,  see  chap.   xxv.

the   war,  which  made  him   dependent  on   the   Russian  government, for   he   had   no  money  and,   as   time  went  on,   he   was  obliged   to replace  his   payments  by   political  concessions.

Mahmoud's  Reforms  (1826-38). - Mahmoud,  who  had  been Sultan  since  1808,   wished,  like  Peter  the   Great,   to   reform  his empire  on  the   European  model.  This  admiration  for  Europe had  been  handed  down  to   him,   it   was  said,   by   his   uncle  Selim (1788-1807),  who  had   fallen  a   victim  to   it,   for   he   was   deposed   for having  wished  to   reform  the   janissaries.

Mahmoud  began  with  the   army.  During  the   war  with  Greece he   announced  (May,   1826)   the   formation  of   a   troop   to   be   trained by   Arabs.  He   proposed,  not  to   introduce  new  schemes,  but   to restore  the   ancient  Ottoman  tradition  (Solyman's  regulations), which  had  been  unduly  abandoned.  He   ordered  the   janissaries to   furnish  some  of   the   men  for   his   new  army.  The  janissaries mutinied.  Mahmoud,  supported  by   other  bodies,  ordered  a   discharge of   cannon  on  the   janissaries'  barracks,  at   the   same  time, it   is   said,   ordering  the   back  gates   to   be   opened   as  a   means  of escape.  The  most  unruly  of   them  were  massacred,  and  the Sultan  declared  the   janissaries  abolished  (1826).  Later  he   abolished the   other   ancient  bodies  of   spahis   and   armorers.

A   new  army  was  then  formed,  with  European  dress  and   discipline, numbering  70,000  men.  A   Prussian  officer,  von   Moltke, who  later  became  so   famous,  had   an  active  part   in   this   organization, and   has   given   a   satirical  description  of   it   in   his   Letters: "   The  reform  consisted  chiefly  in   externals,  names,  and  trappings. The   army   was   built   on   the   European  plan,   with   Russian tunics,  a   French  code,   Belgian   guns,   Turkish  turbans,  Hungarian saddles,  English  sabres,  drill-sergeants  of   every  nation,  an  army composed  of   timariotes,  of   soldiers  for   life,   of   a   landwehr  without fixed  terms  of   service,  in   which  the   leaders  were  recruits,  and the   recruits  enemies  of   the   day   before."

Mahmoud  also  aspired,  like  Peter  the   Great,  to  reform  the manners  of   his   empire   on   the   European  model.  He   drank  wine, in   spite   of   the   Koran,  and   liked  to   see   his   high   officials  tipsy. He  dressed  like  an   Egyptian,  in   short  clothes,  with  a  short-cut beard,  and  settled  the   cut  and  material  of   the   clothing  of   his courtiers.  He  even  made  an  ordinance  (1837)  on  the   length   of the   mustache,  and  ordered,  contrary  to   custom,  that  the   beard should  be   cut  an   inch   from  the   chin.

Mahmoud  broke  up   that  sort  of   official  aristocracy  which,  at the   court  and   in   the   provinces,  was   beginning  to   form  a  class

of   hereditary  office-holders.  He   disturbed  the   Divan  by   introducing the   custom  of   deciding   matters  with   each   minister  individually. He   intimidated  the   body   of   ulemas  (at   once  theologians and   judges)   to   prevent   its   making   any   open  opposition to   his   reforms.  But  for   the   reconstruction  of   regular  institutions he   could  not   find   sufficiently  well-educated  helpers   among the   Mussulmans  *   and   he   could  not  avail  himself  of   the   services of   Europeans,  who  were  despised  as   Christians.  He   did   not  succeed in   reforming  the   financial  system.  His   imitation  of   Europe was  only   superficial  and   had   no  effect,   except  on   the   army.

Crisis  of   the   Egyptian  Conflict  (1833-40). - While  these  reforms were  on  foot,   the   Ottoman  Empire  underwent  a  new  crisis. Mehemet-Ali,  governor  of   Egypt,  after  aiding   the   Sultan  against the   Greeks,  had  become  embroiled  with  the  Ottoman  government, headed  by   the   grand   vizier  Chosrew  Pasha,  his   personal enemy.

Mehemet  claimed  first  of   all   the   government  of   Syria,   which the   Sultan  had   promised  him  in   return  for   his   assistance.  After waiting 'three  years   he   determined  to   occupy   it   by   force  (1831), while  still   acknowledging  himself  subject   to   the   Sultan,  to   whom he   offered  a   large   sum  of   money,  at   the   same  time  demanding investiture.  His  enemies  at  court,  however,  persuaded  Mahmoud  to   declare  him  a  rebel.  Then  his   army,  which  was  in control  of   Syria,   invaded  Asia   Minor  and   marched  on   Constantinople. Mahmoud  became  alarmed  and  asked  help   from  the Tsar,   who,   as  protector  of   the   Ottoman  Empire,  sent  15,000   Russians to   camp   before  Constantinople  and   defend  it.   In   exchange he   secured  the   treaty  of   Unkiar-Skelessi  (1833),  which,  under guise   of   an  alliance,  established  a   Russian  protectorate.  Russia promised  to   bring   aid   to   the   Sultan,  who  in   return  opened  the straits  to   the   Russian  navy.   France,  which  supported  MehemetAli,   secured  for   him   a   grant   of   the   government  of   Syria.

*   "   It   is   almost  impossible,"  says  von   Moltke,  "   for   a   European  to   realize the  state  of   Eastern  intelligence.  .  .   A   Turk  who  can  read  and  write poses  as  a  scholar."  He  tells  how  one  of   the   best  educated  dignitaries could  not   believe  that  the   earth  was  round.  No   one,  with  the   exception of   the   Christian  renegades,  speaks  a   foreign  language.  For  the   rest,  von Moltke  recognises  the  progress  in   their  manners.  "   That  the   Sultan  has dared  to   dismiss  a   man  like  Chosrew,  who  has   raised  32   of   his   slaves  to the   rank  of   pasha,   without  bringing  his   head  to   the   block,   is   a   proof   of Turkish  progress,  for   that  would  formerly  have  been  impossible"  (1836). It   was  also   a   mark  of   progress  that  when  the   Sultan's  daughter  brought  a son   into   the   world  the   child  was  not  strangled  ; it   was  simply   announced that   he   had   died   a   natural  death,  as   has   been  done  ever  since  in   like   cases.

Mehemet  represented  himself  always  as  a   faithful  servant  of the   Sultan,*  who  wished  not  to   destroy  the   Ottoman  Empire, but   to   consolidate  it   by   dismissing  the   bad   ministers  and   taking their  place   in   the   master's  favour.  In   the   East,   as   formerly  in Europe,  resistance  to   the   sovereign's  agents   did   not  mean  revolt against  the   sovereign.  But  the   European  powers  regarded  the question  differently;  they   looked  upon   Mehemet  as  an   independent sovereign,   the   Sultan's  rival,   and   an  enemy   to   the   Ottoman Empire.  They   prepared  to   stop   him. man

The  crisis  had  effected  the  consolidation  of   the  Ottoman Empire.

After  the   death  of   Mahmoud,  Chosrew,  on   his   return  from  an expedition  against  the   Kurds,  thought  himself  strong  enough  to take  back  Syria   from  Mehemet,  but  his   army  was  put   to   rout (1839).  This  was  a  renewal  of   the   war  of   1833.   'The   Egyptian army  crossed  Asia  Minor  and  marched  on   Constantinople.  But this   time  the   English  government  interfered,  and  induced  the other  powers,  against  the   wish  of   France,  to   impose  terms  of peace  upon   Mehemet  and  even  insist  upon   his   resigning  Syria (1840).  Then,  to   deprive  Russia  of   her   monopoly  in   protecting the   Sultan,   it   secured  the   Straits  Convention  (1841),   which  closed the   two  straits  to   all   European  fleets.

The  Reforms  of   Eeschid  Pasha  (1838-50). - Mahmoud  died before  the  Egyptian  crisis  was  over  (1838).  His  successor, Abdul-Medjid,  left   the   government  to   his   ministers.  The  head minister,  Reschid  Pasha,  had   formerly  been  ambassador  to   England and   had   learned  there   the   force   of   public   opinion.  He   tried to   introduce  European  institutions,  and,   to   win   favour  in   Europe, he   had   them  announced  by   a   solemn  act  copied   from  the   European charters.

The  hatti-sherif  of   November  3,   1839,   was  promulgated  at   Guhlane  (one   of   the   Sultan's  gardens),  in   the   presence  of   great   dignitaries, deputies   from   the   ra'ia   peoples   (Greeks,  Armenians,

*   According  to   Prokesch-Osten,  an   Austrian  diplomat,  Mehemet  said  as early   as  1829   to   an   English  agent   who  had  come  to   offer  him  a   chance  to make  himself  independent:  "You  are  a  stranger,  you   do   not  know  a Mussulman's  way  of   thinking.  .  .   Do   you   know  what  the   breaking  up   of the   Empire  would  mean  to   me   ?   Every  Mussulman  would  start  from  me with  horror,  my  own  son  would  be   the  first  to   desert  me.  The  Sultan  is insane,  but  God  has  given  him  to   us   for   our  sins."  In   1833   he   is   said   to have  remarked  to   Europeans  in   Alexandria:  "   I   wish  to   remain  the   Sultan's servant.  .   .   Ibrahim,  if   he   reached  the   Bosporus,  would  throw  himself at   the   Sultan's  feet,   ask   his   pardon   and   permission  to   return  to   Egypt."

Catholics,  Jews),   and   the   European  diplomatic  corps,  with  a   solemn ceremonial,  a   salute  of   101  guns,  a   prayer,  and   an  astrologer to   watch  the   propitious  moment  for   the   reading.  The   hatti-sherif was  a  sort  of   constitutional  charter,  given   by   the   Sultan  to   his subjects,  to   all   his   subjects  without  religious  distinction.  The Sultan  commended  old   customs,  declared  that  trouble  had  come from  abandoning  them,  and  so  proclaimed  new  institutions. This  contradiction  was  inherent  in   the   situation  of   a  reformer among  a  people   atttached  to   religious  tradition.  These  national institutions  were  to   guarantee  to   subjects  of   every  religion  security of   life,   honour,  and  fortune.  The  Sultan  promised  to abolish  tax-farming,  confiscation,  and  monopolies.

Recognising  in   the   raias  the   same  private   rights   that   the   Mussulmans enjoyed   was  a   revolution.  The  hatti-sherif  confined itself,   however,  to   promises.  Reschid  laboured  to   introduce  its measures  into  practice.  A   number  of   European  institutions  had already  been  adopted,  lighthouses  on  the   Bosporus,  a   hospital, and  a  quarantine;  a  ministerial  council  had   been  established  to make  the  central  government  more  regular.  Resdiid  tried  to reform  the   financial  system.  By   means  of   commercial  treaties he   got   the   European  governments  to  renounce  the   maximum tariff   which  had   formerly  been  stipulated,  and   in   return  he   abolished the   complicated  system  of   variable  rates  of   internal  transportation, replacing   it   with  a   single   tariff   of   9   pe,r   cent,  on   foreign merchandise.  This  facilitated  trade  with  Europe.  Within  the Empire  he   abolished  tax-farming,  and   ordered  that  the   poll   tax should  be   apportioned  and  levied  by   districts  and   paid   over  to receivers.

These  reforms  irritated  the   Mussulmans,  who  favoured  the   old regime,  the   "   Old   Turk  "   party,  who   sought   to   turn  the   Sultan against  his   ministry.  Abdul-Medjid  wavered  between  the   Old Turks  and  the  reformers.  This  contest  was  complicated  by   a struggle  for   influence  between  the   two  rival  European  powers, England  and  Russia,  which  had  each  its   special  party   in   the Sultan's  court.  Reschid  supported  England,  Riza  supported Russia.  Several  times  Reschid  was  dismissed,  then  recalled. Riza  also  attempted  a  number  of   reforms.  While  Reschid  and Riza  were  contending,  the   officials,  left   to   their  own   devices,  restored the   old   system   of   tax-farming  and   collection  by   military governors.

Reschid  had   regard   for   the   good   opinion  of   Europe,  especially of   England.  "   I   agree,"   he   said   in   1846,   "   that   our  government

is   still   far   from  good.   But  we  prevent  its   being   worse." Abdul-Medjid  himself  seemed  to   be   interested  in   reforms.  He read  in   public   a   decree,   drawn  up   by   his   own   hand,   in   which  he declared  himself  very  regretful  that  his   projects  had  not  produced the   desired  result  and   announced  the   establishment  of schools  to   instil  in   his   subjects   the   principles  of   science  and   industry (1845).

These  confused  reforms,  interrupted  by   reactions - these  creations which,   for   the   most  part,   remained  only   promises - did   not lead   to   a   very   profound  reorganization  of   the   Empire.  The   only lasting   institution  was  the   army,  recruited  by   the   European  system of   conscription.  It   was  divided  into  two  parts,  the   active army   (Nizam),  with  a   five-year  service,  and  the   reserve  (Redif), with  a   seven-year  term,  organized  in   five   local  army  corps,  and supplied  with  European  arms.  As   before  it   was  composed  only of   Mussulmans.  It   was  an  army  of   good   soldiers,  brave  and steady,  but   commanded  by   incompetent  officers.

Reschid  decreed  a  complete  reorganization  of   the   administration. The   hitherto  general   power  of   the   governor  of   the   province was   divided  among  three  distinct  officials,  a   military   governor, a   civil   administrator  (vali),   and   a   receiver  of   taxes.  Thus were  established  three  services,  each  with  a   minister  at   its   head, as   in   Europe.  Reschid  had   hoped   to   make  the   vali   the   principal officer  by   putting   the   police   under  his   control,  and   tried  to   control him   by   establishing  provincial  councils  of   notables ; but   these councils  'hindered  reform.  Judicial  reorganization  was  confined to   a   number  of   mixed  courts,  composed  of   Mussulmans  and Europeans,  with  a  written  procedure.  Financial  reform  was abandoned  for  lack  of   honest  agents,  and  taxes  and  customs duties  were  again   farmed  out.  The  state  schools  which  had been  announced  were  not  established.  The  bank  which  Reschid had   attempted  to   found  was  replaced  by   the   Ottoman  Bank,   managed by   Europeans.

This  was,   however,  a  period   of   relative  prosperity  and   peace (except  for   the   insurrection  of   the   Christians  in   Crete  in   1841). The  government  became  less  harsh,  and   torture  and   confiscation disappeared.

Period  of   the   Crimean  War  (1852-59). - The  attempt  at   reorganization on   the   European  model  had   given   the   European  governments the   hope   of   settling   the   Eastern  Question  by   the   transformation of   the   Ottoman  Empire  into  a   modern  state.  Tsar Nicholas,  however,  did   not  accept  this  solution.  As   early   as

1844,   in   his   visit   to   England,  he   had   said:   "There  are   in   my Cabinet  two  opinions  on   Turkey;  one  that   she   is   dying,   the   other that  she   is   already   dead.  In   either  case  nothing  will   prevent her  speedy  end."  In   1852   he   said  to   the   English  ambassador that   "   they   ought   to   agree  about  the   funeral."  The   English   government preferred   to   maintain  the   Ottoman  Empire   by   checking the   Tsar,   and   succeeded  in   forming  a   league   with   Napoleon  III. and  the   King   of   Sardinia.  (See   chap,   xxvii.)

The  conflict  was  complicated  by   the  quarrel  between  the Catholic  monks,  who  were  under  France's  protection,  and  the Greek  monks,  who  were  under  that  of   Russia.  They   were  disputing over   the   possession  of   the   keys   of   the   Holy   Places  in Palestine  (Bethlehem  and  the   Holy   Sepulchre).  After  long   negotiation the   Tsar  .brought  his   army   into  Moldavia,  declaring that  'he   came  to   protect  the   Orthodox  Church.  This  was  the beginning  of   the   war   (for   the   history   of   it,   see  chap,   xxvii.).   But the   European  armies  defended  the   Ottoman  Empire  and   carried the   war   into   the   Crimea.

At   the   Congress  of   Paris  (1856)   the   European  powers,  considering the   Empire  necessary  to   the   balance  of   power,   declared the   integrity  of   Ottoman  territory  guaranteed;  but   in   return  they imposed  on  the   Sultan  certain  concessions.

Napoleon  secured  autonomy  for   Moldavia  and   Walachia.  This was  the   second  break  in   the   Empire.

Even  in   the   interior  of   the   Empire  the   powers,  which  had hitherto  had  confidence  in   the   credit  of   the   Ottoman  government, demanded  pledges   for   the   making   of   various  long-promised reforms.  The   Sultan  promulgated  a  reform  edict  (hattihumayoun,  February,  1856)   and  communicated  it   to  the   other governments,  who  replied :   "   The  contracting  powers  appreciate the   high   value  of   this   communication.  It   is   well  understood that  it   could  not   in   any   case  give   the   said   powers  the   right   to interfere,  either  collectively  or  separately,  in   the   relations  of   the Sultan  with  his   subjects,  nor   in   the   internal  administration  of the   Empire." ised

The  hatti-humayoun  did   not  proclaim  the   principle  of   personal security  simply,  as   in   1839,   but   a^so   °f   liberty   and   legal   equality for   all   Ottoman  subjects  without  distinction  of   religion.  All legal   difference  between  Mussulmans  and  Christians  was  suppressed. Christians  should  be   admitted  to   every  military  rank and  to   every  office,   they   should  no   longer   pay   the   poll-tax,  they should  be   represented  in   the   provincial  councils.  The  Ottoman

Empire  would  thereby  lose  its   religious  character.  But  the   full promise  could  not   be   secured.  The  English  government  wished to   have   the   death  penalty   abolished  in   the   case  of   a   Mussulman converted  to  another  religion.  European  indignation  was aroused  by   the   case  of   a   young   Christian  who   had   become  a   Mussulman in   a   moment  of   anger  and   was   later  put   to   death  on  reverting to   his   own  religion.  The  Ottoman  government  replied that   it   could   give   its   word   that   the   penalty   would  not   be   enforced again,   but   that   to   proclaim  it   in   a   public   act  would  provoke  an outburst  of   fanaticism.  England  had   to   be   content  with  an  ambiguous article.  "   All   religious  creeds  shall  be   freely   practised ; no   Ottoman  subject  shall  be   hindered  or   disturbed  in   the   exercise of   his   religion,  or  constrained  to   change   it."

Attempts  at   Reform,  Fuad  and  All  (1859-71). - The  hattihumayoun  promised  radical  reform,  a   lay   state,   in   which  Christians would   be   protected  by   law;   but   as   the   Mussulman  system gave   them  no  protection,  to   make  them  equal   with  Mussulmans would  have  involved  a  struggle  which  the   Ottoman  government dared  not   face.  On   the   other  hand,   the   European  powers  had acted  upon  this   promise  and   kept   watch  over  the   government  to insist  upon   its   being   kept.   The   Sultan  found  himself  in   a   tight place,   between  'his   subjects,  who  did   not  want  the   reform,  and the   foreign   powers,  who  insisted  upon   it.

The  Christian  subjects  themselves  distrusted  the  reform. Their  leaders,  patriarchs  and   bishops,  were  fearful  of   losing   their power  over  the   faithful,  for   the   government,  after  declaring  all its   subjects  equal,   had   drawn  from  that   the   conclusion  that  the privileges  of   religious  communities  must  be   abolished,  or  at   least revised.  The  Christians  held  to   their  privileges;  a   common  system represented  to   their   minds  simply   the   absence  of   special   protection, and   that   meant  to   be   given   defenceless  into   the   hands  of the   Mussulmans.  They   were  unwilling  to  serve  in   the   army, preferring  to   make  a  money  payment;  the   poll-tax  was  restored in   the   form   of   a   tax   for   exemption  from  military   service.

The  Mussulmans,  accustomed  to   despise  unbelievers,  were  unwilling to   obey   them,  either  as  military  or  civil  officers.  The government  announced  a   judicial  reform.  Justice  was  to   be separated  from  the  administration,  and  administered  by   mixed courts  chosen  by   notables,  where  Christians  would  be   allowed  to testify   as  well   as   Mussulmans,  where  judgment  would  be   based on  modern  codes,  with  public   sittings  and  a   regular  procedure. All   Turkey  knew  that   this   reform  could  not   be   applied.  It   was

not  applied,  and   the   Christian  mountaineers  of   Herzegovina,  supported by   their  neighbours  in   Montenegro,  finally   revolted ; *   an army   had   to   be   sent  to   subdue  them  (1860-61).

The  governments  of   Europe  officially  expressed  their  regret that   the   Ottoman  Empire  "   was  not  proceeding  to   a   gradual   and sustained  application  of   reforms  "   (1859),   and   Russia  proposed  an investigation  into  the   condition  of   the   Christians.  But   their  attention was   either   distracted  by   Italian  affairs  or  absorbed  by   the massacre  of   Christians  in   Libanus.  In   1861   Abdul-Medjid  died, and  the   new  Sultan,  Abdul-Aziz,  left   the   government  to   Fuad and  Ali,   two   favourites,  acknowledged  reformers.  Their  sway, however,  was  at   times  interrupted.  (It   was  said  that  once  he offered  the   government  to   a   dancing  dervish.)

The  leading  reform  was  an  attempt  to   keep   the   promise  made in   1856   by   separating  justice   from  the   general  administration (1864).  In   each  of   the   administrative  subdivisions,  vilayet   (government), sandjak   (department),  kaza   (district),  a   tribunal  and council  of   notables  were  established,  naturally  composed  chiefly of   Mussulmans,  for   the   lists   were  prepared  by   Mussulmans.

In   Crete,   where  the   population  is   mainly   Greek  and   Christian, and   partly   composed  of   armed  mountaineers,  the   discontent  took the   form  of   a   general   insurrection  (there   had   already   been  one   in 1841).  The  Greek  patriots  in   the   Kingdom  of   Greece  laboured to   bring   back  Crete  into  the   Hellenic  union.  A   Cretan  committee established  at   Athens  kept   in   touch  with   the   people   of   the island.  In   1866  the   Christians  formed  a  committee,  which  presented a   petition  to   the   Sultan,  denouncing  the   abuse  of   power by   the   governors  apd   Mussulmans,  and  claiming  personal  and property  rights.  The  government  refused  to   do   them  justice, and  the   whole  Christian  population  rose  in   revolt  (May,   1866). The  general  assembly  of   Cretans  decreed  Ottoman  rule   abolished and  Crete  "   united  indissolubly  to   her   mother,  Greece  "   (September). The   insurgents   occupied   the   whole  island,   except  the strongholds  in   the  north,  where  the  Mussulmans  had  taken refuge.  Arms  and  volunteers  came  from  Greece  to   aid   them,   but the   European  powers,  whose  help   they   asked,  refused  to   inter-

*   The   petition  sent  by   the   Christians  to   the   European  consuls  at   Mostar shows  their  usual  grievances  :   "We  want  permission  to   build  churches,  to place   bells  in   them  and  ring   them,  we  want  a   bishop   of   our  own  race  to direct  our  religious  affairs,  we  want  schools,  we  want  to   have  taxes  established in   a   fixed  sum  for   each  house,  and   we   do   not   want  to   have  Zaptiehs (gendarmes)  lodged  in   our   houses."

vene.  When  the   Turkish  army,  of   30,000  men  at   the   least,   took the   offensive  (October,  1866),   the   insurgents  were  quickly  driven back  into  the   mountains,  where  the   people   of   Sphakia  held  out until  1868.  The  Greeks  in   Epirus   and   Thessaly  attempted  a   revolt, but   failed.

The  investigation  made  by   the   powers,  in   1867,   showed  that the   equality  promised  in   1856   had  not   been  realized.  The  admission of   Christians  to   office  was   imaginary;  they   were  accepted only   in   subordinate  positions.  These  officers  had   no   influence, and  were  detested  by   the   Christians  of   other  creeds.  Mixed courts  were  very  rare,  and   besides  Christians  had   not  the   courage to   sit   in   them.  A   Christian  could  not  obtain  justice   against  a Mussulman,  as   his   testimony  was  not   listened  to;   the   only   way for   him  to   get   justice   done  him   was  to   bribe  two   Mussulman witnesses.  In   the   army  the   Christians  were  unwilling  to   serve with  Mussulmans  and  the  Mussulmans  were  unwilling  to  obey unbelievers;  the   army  therefore  remained  Mussulman.  Public procedure  in   the   courts  remained  a   figment  of   the   imagination, for   police   guarded   the   entrance  to   the   hall.  The   prisons   were   horrible, and   the   police   (saptiehs}  were  recruited  from   the   criminal classes.  The  tax-farming  which  the  reformers  had  worked  so hard  to   abolish  had   been  restored;  the   budget   was   illusory,  control of   the   Court  of   Accounts  amounted  to   nothing,  "   boodlers  " were  not  prosecuted,  the   Supreme  Council  of   Justice  had  met only   once.  The  only   institutions  that  were  respected  were  the privileges  of   religious  communities,  and   the   powers  of   patriarchs, including  their  abuse  of   power,  because  these  were  old   institutions.

Europe  accordingly  protested  against  the   failure  to   execute the   hatti-humayoun  of   1856.   A   struggle  for   influence  ensued  between France  and   Russia,  to   determine  what  reforms  should  be made.  France  proposed  the   fusion   of   races,  that   is,   to   suppress all   "   distinction  between  the   various  nationalities,"  to   establish civil   equality  and   uniform  administration  as   in   France,  so  as   to form  a   single   Ottoman  nation.  Russia  had   already  declared  herself opposed   to   an   "   incoherent  fusion  of   the   Ottoman  peoples  "; she   demanded  for   each  "   special   guarantees  based  on  religious and  communal  institutions  adapted  to   the   nationalist  principle." "   Equality  before  the   law   will   never  be   realized  in   Turkey   so   long as   Turks  are   Turks;  that  is,   until  they   forswear  the   Koran, which  traces  an   ineffaceable  line  between  them  and  the   Christians." Russia's  advice   was   to   "   separate  Christian  and   Mussultians.

man  interests  by   granting  parallel  and  progressive  development to   all   nationalities  and   creeds  under  the   Sultan,  in   accordance with  the   exigencies  of   European  balance  of   power   "  ; this   meant to   make  every   Christian  nationality  a   little  self-governing  state. Fiance's  advice  was  that  of   a   friend,  kindly   but   impracticable; Russia's  scheme  was  practicable  but  dangerous,  for   the  autonomy of   hostile  races  was  the   same  as   dismemberment.

The  Ottoman  government  at   first  followed  France's  advice;  it attempted  fusion  and  tried  to   improve  its   administrative  staff   by giving  its   young  men  a   European  education.  The  French  College of   Galata,  a   suburb  of   Constantinople,  was   founded  at   this time.  But  the   two  reform  ministers  died,   Fuad  in   1869,   AH   in 1871.  The  defeat  of   France  by   Germany  put   an  end   to   her   influence over   the   Sultan,   and   destroyed   the   European  concert  which was  protecting  the   Ottoman  Empire  against  Russia.

Financial  Crisis  and   Young  Turkey  (1871-76). - After  1871   the disorder  increased.  The  deficit  became  so   large   (112,000,000  in 1875)   and   money  so  scarce  that   the   government  became  partially bankrupt.  It   declared  itself  able  to  pay  only   a   half  of   the interest  on  the   debt.  Taxes  grew   heavier  and  discontent  increased, until   at   length   the   Christian  Serbs  in   Herzegovina,  excited by   their  Montenegrin  neighbours,  and  possibly  by   emissaries from   Servia   and   Russia,   refused  to   perform   the   corvee  and rose  in   rebellion  (1875).  The  European  powers,  being   busy   at the   time  with  their  own  domestic  affairs,  took  little  interest  in the   Ottoman  Empire.

The  Turkish  government,  to  calm  the   malcontents,  issued  a new  reform  edict  (1875),   once  more  announcing  the   admission  of all   subjects   to   office,   abolition  of   tax-farming,  judicial   reorganization, and   a   council  to   supervise  the   execution  of   the   reforms. But   the   states  of   Europe   had   lost   their  faith   in   promises.  They replied   with   a   collective  note,   named  after   Andrassy,  the   Austrian minister:  "The  powers  feel  that  there  exists  a  strict  unity   of interest  between  Europe  and  Turkey  and  the   insurgents;  they hold  that  reform  must  be   adopted  to   put   a   stop   to   a   disastrous and  bloody  contest  "   (December  30,  1875).  It   was  therefore necessary  "   that   Christianity  should  be   put   on   the   same  footing with  Islamism,  in   theory  and  practice  .  .  .   that  tax-farming should  be   abolished  once  for   all."  It   was  not  necessary  "   that   the execution  of   reforms  should  be   left   to   the   discretion  of   pashas ;   a controlling  board  should  be   established,  made  up   of   Christians and  Mussulmans."  This  time  the   Empire's  protectors  were  not

content  with  promises,  but  demanded  guarantees  and  control. The  Turkish  government  refused.

The  insurrection  in   Herzegovina  became  a  real  war.  Later the   Bulgarian  peasants,  excited  by   a  committee,  made  a  slight attempt  at   revolt  (May,   1876).  At   the   same  time,   in   Salonica, the  Mussulman  mob  assassinated  the  French  and  English consuls.

Then  came  a  new  sort  of   crisis  in   Turkey.  For  some  years there  had   been  increasing  dissatisfaction  with  Sultan  Abdul-Aziz and   his   extravagances.  He   was  said  to   be   insane.  Among  the Mussulmans,  mainly  of   the   younger  generation,  had  sprung  up a   party,   Young   Turkey,  demanding  a  constitution.  As   early   as 1868  Kereddin  held  that  according  to  the   tradition  of   Solyman, ulcmas  and   ministers  had   the   right   to   remonstrate  with  the   Sultan, and,   if   he   should  persist   in   violating  the   law   and   following out   his   caprices,  the   right   to   depose   him.  A   manifesto  issued  by Mussulman  patriots  to   the   foreign  powers  (March,  1876)   said: "   If   instead  of   a   despot   Turkey   possessed  a   wise   monarch  who would  lean  on  a  consulting  Chamber  composed  of   representatives from   all   our  races  and   religions,   she   would  be   saved.  That is   the   true  solution,  and   it   is   not  contrary  to   the   Koran;  the Turkish  government  is   elective."

Young  Turkey  profited  by   the   excitement  following  the   Bulgarian insurrection.  The   theological  students  (softas)   came  en masse  before  the   palace.  The  Sultan  sent  to  ask  what  they wanted.  "   We   want  nothing,"  they   said,   "   but   the   reigning  government is   good   for   nothing."  The  Sultan  was  alarmed,  immediately dismissed  his   grand   vizier  (May   18),   then   took  as   his minister  one  of   the  leader's  of   Young  Turkey,  Midhat-Pasha (  May   19) .   This   was  the   minister  who   made  terms  with   the   guardian of   the   faith,   the   Scheik-ul-Islam,  getting   from  him  a   decision declaring   the   Sultan  incapable  of   carrying  on   the   government. Abdul-Aziz  was   deposed  (March  30,   1876),   and   immediately after   it   was  announced  that  he   had  killed  himself.  His nephew,  Mourad  V.,   was  proclaimed  his   successor,  but   very  soon became  insane.  He   was  deposed  and  replaced  by   Abdul-Hamid (August  31,   1876).  Midhat  governed  in   the   name  of   the   Sultan. Midhat  had  to  reply   to   Europe's  demand  in   behalf  of   the Christians  of   Herzegovina,  that  a   commision  be   sent  to   make  reforms under   the   supervision  of   the   European  consuls.  Then  he had   to   fight   the   Bulgarian  insurgents.  As   the   regular   army  was busy   in   Herzegovina,  bands  of   irregulars,  half   brigands  (Bashiment.

Bazouks),  were  turned  on   Bulgaria;  they   amused  themselves with  burning  the   villages,  massacring  the   men,  and   carrying  off the   women.  (According  to  the  American  consul  100  villages were  destroyed,  from  25,000  to  40,000  inhabitants  massacred, and  12,000  women  carried  away;  the  English  consul  reduced these  figures  to   68   villages  and  12,000  to  15,000  inhabitants.) Europe  rose  in   horror.  The   assassination  of   the   consuls  at   Salonica  and  the   Bulgarian  atrocities,  as   Gladstone  called  them, completed  the   turn  of   public   opinion  against  the   Turks.  The governments  dared  not  interfere  in   favour  of   the  Ottoman Empire.

Servia,  upheld   by   Russia,  openly   entered  the   war   in   July,   1876, invoking  "   Panslavism."  The  Sultan's  government  could  not pay   the   interest  on  even  the   debt  to   which  it   had   reduced  its creditors.  The  powers  began   to   regard   the   Ottoman  Empire  as a   minor  incapable  of   taking   care  of   itself;   they   determined  to   take it   under  their  guardianship.  They   began   by   imposing  on   it   an armistice  with  the   conquered  Servians.  They   then  held  a  conference at   Constantinople  and  finally   drew  up   the   Berlin  Memorandum- a   schedule  of   reforms  to   be   imposed   on   the   Sultan,   England not   assenting   thereto.

Young  Turkey,  to  avoid  this  European  guardianship,  had dreamed  of   transforming  the   absolutist  empire  into  a  constitutional monarchy.  The   Ottoman  nation,  putting  an  end  to   the Sultan's  arbitrary  rule,   was  to   take  charge   of   its   own  affairs;  it would  be   able  at   once  to   reorganize  the   country  and   make  it needless  for  foreign  powers  to   interfere.  It   is   hard  to  tell whether  the   authors  of   this   scheme  really   thought  the   constitutional system   would  prevent  the   fall   of   the   Ottoman  Empire,   or were  simply   acting   out  a   comedy   for   the   entertainment  of   Europe,' in   order  to   get   rid   of   foreign   intervention.

The  constitution,  drafted  in   secret  by   a   committee  of   officials and  ulemas,  was  promulgated  unexpectedly,  but  with  solemn ceremony,  in   December,  1876.   It   was  a   European  form  of   constitution, with   a   responsible  Council  of   Ministers,  a   General Assembly  of   two   Chambers,  a   Senate  and   an  elective  Chamber  of Deputies,  liberty   of   the   press  and   of   public   meeting,  permanent judges,  and  even  compulsory  primary  education.  Islamism  remained the   state   religion.   In   laying   this   constitution  before  the powers,  care  was  taken  to   point   out   its   lack   of   theocratic  tendencies, "   that  it   established  in   the   Empire   the   reign   of   liberty,   justice, and   equality,   and   the   triumph   of   civilization,"  and   above  all tice,

that   "   the   constitution  was  not  a   promise,  but   a   real   and   formal act  which  has  become  the  property  of   all   Ottoman  subjects." Consequently,  when  the  powers  presented  their  reform  ultimatum, a   great  council,  composed  of   high   officials,  replied   that these  demands  were  contrary  to   the   constitution  (January,  1877).

Russian  Invasion,  Crisis  and  Dismemberment  (1877-78). Young  Turkey's  reign  was  short;  Midhat- Pasha,  grand-vizier and  head  of   the   government,  suddenly  fell  (February,  1877). The  Chamber,  which  was  made  up  principally  of   Mussulmans, creatures  of   the   governors,  served  only   to   reject   the   demands  of Europe.  (The   deputies  were  known  by   a  name  already  old   in the   East:  Evet  Effendim,  the   Yes,   Sirs.)

Europe  had   ceased  to   believe  in   reforms  made  by   Mussulmans  ; all,   even   England,  accepted  the   scheme  proposed  by   Russia,  the autonomy  of   the  Christian  nationalities  and  supervision  by European  agents.  The  conference  of   Constantinople  (March, 1877)   declared  that  "   the   powers  propose  to  observe  through their  ambassadors  the   manner  in   which  the   promises  of   the   government shall   be   executed,"  and   that   "   if   their   hope   were  again deceived,  they   would  consider  measures  in   common."  Europe was  abandoning  the   Ottoman  Empire.

Russia  took  up   again   the   plan   arrested  in   1854   by   Europe. The  Tsar  declared  war,  this   time  not   in   the   name  of   religion   as   in 1854,   but   in   the   interests  of   Russia  and   of   Europe   disturbed  by agitations  of   oppressed  Christians.  This  was  a  repetition  of   the war  of   1828-29.  The  Russian  army,  aided  by   the   Roumanian army,   finally   arrived  at   Andrianople  and   forced  the   Sultan  to   accept peace   on   the   terms   dictated  by   Russia  ( Peace  of   San   Stef  ano, 1878.  On   the   Russo-Turkish  war,  see  chap   xxviii.).

Russia  demanded  the   separation  of   all   the   Christian  countries, except  those  occupied  by   the   Greeks  (Thessaly,  Crete),  in   which she   was  not   interested.  The  Sultan  renounced  his   sovereignty over  all   the   Christian  peoples  who  were  still  tributary  to   him (Roumania,  Servia,  Montenegro),  and  granted  them  their  territory. He   recognised  a   new   Christian  state,   Bulgaria,  composed of   the   country  on   both  sides  of   the   Balkans  and  Macedonia. This  was  a   definite  dismemberment.  The  Empire  retained  only three  scattered  bits   in   Europe:  I.   Roumelia;  2.   the   peninsula  of Salonica,  Thessaly,  Epirus,  and  Albania;  3.   Bosnia,  and   Herzegovina, where   the   Christians  were  to   have   an   independent  administration.

The  other  European  governments  found  this  dismemberment

too   favourable  to   Russia,  and   the   Congress  of   Berlin  adopted another.  The  three  Christian  states,  Roumania,  Servia,  and Montenegro,  became  sovereign  states,  with  increased  territory. They   cut   down  the   share  of   the   two  states  specially   protected  by Russia,  Montenegro,  and   more  particularly  Bulgaria  ( see  p.   665 ) . To   make  up   for   this,   they   asked  Austria  to   occupy   Bosnia  and Herzegovina  for   the   purpose  of   restoring  order  there,   without  fixing the   limit   of   time   for   the   occupation.  France  and   Italy   secured a   promise  of   an  enlargement  for   Greece;  but   a  change  of   the diplomatic  situation  came  near  to   making  the   promise  worthless. It   was  only   after  long   negotiation  that  Greece  succeeded  in obtaining  from  the   Ottoman  government  Thessaly  and  a   bit   of Epirus  (1881).

The  Empire  now  held  in   Europe  only   the   Mussulman  provinces of   Roumelia  (vilayets  of   Constantinople  and  Adrianople), Albania  and   Epirus,  and   the   Christian  province  of   Macedonia.

Personal  Government  of   Abdul-Hamid. - The  crisis  of   1878   left the   Ottoman  Empire  heavily  involved.  It   had   to   arrange  terms of   evacuation  with  Russia  and   a   war   indemnity;  the   Empire,  for the   lack   of   money,  remained  in   debt   to   Russia.  It   had   to   arrange with   Austria  for   the   situation  of   Bosnia;  technically  the Sulten  remained  sovereign  over  it,   but   he   recognised  Austria's right   to   organize   the   province  as  she   wished,  with   the   promise   to respect  religious  freedom.  In   reality   Bosnia  was  not  only   occupied by   the   Austrian  army,   but   governed,  under  the   direction  of the   common  minister  of   finance  of   Austria-Hungary,  by   a  resident governor  and   a   "   government  "   composed  of   Austrian  officials. The   Sultan  had   also   to   negotiate  with   his   creditors;  the principal  of   the   debt   was  reduced  and   the   customs  revenue  was pledged  as  security,  to   be   administered  by   a   European  commission (1881). cials.

The  Albanian  Mussulmans  in   the   territory  ceded  to   the   Christians made   armed  resistance  to   the   Sultan's  orders.  They   even formed  an   "   Upper- Albanian  League  "   (1878)  which  attacked Montenegro  and  had   to   be   put   down  by   force  (1881).

Abdul-Hamid  at   first  wavered  between  contradictory  influences. He   took   as   grand-vizier  a   protege   of   France,  Khereddin, formerly  a   minister  of   Tunis,  who  announced  a  number  of   reforms; the   Sultan  dismissed  him  when  he   demanded  the   right   to choose  the   ministers  (1879).  He   let   England  propose  a   plan   of reforms  which  were  never  carried  out  (1880).  Then  he   himself took  charge   of   the   government  at   the   head  of   the   ministry.  The

official  Divan  still   existed,  but   the   real   control  of   the   government passed  into  the   hands  of   the   Sultan,  who  adopted  the   custom  of settling   matters  in   personal  consultation  with  his   favourites.  At length,  overburdened  with  suspicions  of   conspiracies,  AbdulHamid  shut  himself  up   in   his   "   Kiosque,"  surrounded  by   a   large guard,  the   hamidies,  composed  .of   Kurds,  Syrians,  and   Albanians, and  showed  himself  to   his   subjects  only   on  rare  occasions.  The Ottoman  Empire  was  subjected  to   the   personal  government  of   a painstaking  but   ill-informed  sovereign.

Abdul-Hamid  seemed  to   wish  to   act  as  religious  head  of   all   the Mussulmans;  he   sought  the   society  of   holy   persons  and   encouraged the   preaching  of   hadjis   (pilgrims  from  Mecca).  He   was even  supposed  to   be   thinking  of   Panislamism,  as  a   cry   to   unite all   the   faithful  under  the   direction  of   the   Sultan.  He   had   dismissed the   advocates  of   European  institutions,  the   authors  of   the revolution  of   1876,   and   had  Midhat-Pasha  condemned  as  the murderer  of   Abdul-Aziz.  Young  Turkey,  taking  refuge  in   foreign lands,   became  a   revolutionary  opposition  party,  trying   to prevail   on   Europe  to   depose   Abdul-Hamid.

Abdul-Hamid  meanwhile  left   himself  to   the   guidance  of   England in   his   choice  of   officers  and,   though   the   reforms  had   failed, succeeded  in   establishing  a   tolerable  administration  in   his   Asiatic provinces.  From  Germany  he   received  some  Prussian  generals (1883)   who  wished  to   reorganize  the   army   by   extending  military service  to   Christians  (1886),   and   a   German  financier  who  tried  to draft  an  exact  budget  (1883).  Except  for   the   chronic  agitation in   Crete  *   and   a   number  of   movements  in   Albania  (1884,   1887), peace  was  almost  restored  in   the   Empire.  This  period   of   calm was  of   advantage  to   the   Armenians,  Gregorian  Christians,  industrious and   peace-loving  mountaineers;  they   formed  all   over  Asia Minor  and  at   Constantinople  a  notable  proportion  of   the   merchants, workingmen,  and   also   officials  in   employments  where

*The  organic  statute  of   1868,  given   to   Crete  after  the   insurrection, established  a   "   national  assembly,"  elected  where  the   Christians  had  the majority.  The  Assembly  and  the   Mussulman  governor  were  in   continual conflict.  The  Christians  demanded  first  of   all   Christian  and  native  officials and   a   part   of   the   custom-duties  and   taxes  of   the   island  to   meet  the expenses  of   the   island.  One  party   (radicals)  continued  to   make  plans   for separation,  in   harmony  with  a   Greek  committee  at   Athens.  The  insurrections continued  during   the   war  of   1877,   in   1885,   1887,   1889,   1895,   1896. The  Turkish  government  promised  reforms  by   ordinance  (1878,  1887,  1896); but  the  Christians  have  continued  to   complain  of   the  despotism  of   the Mussulman  officials  and  have  finally   compelled  Europe  to   interfere.

real   labour  was  necessary.  Europe  protected  them  as   Christians and   agents  of   civilization.

About  1890   Abdul-Hamid  seemed  to  change  his  policy. Shaking  off   German  and   English  influence,  he   turned  to   Russia and  France.  'His  policy   toward  the   Armenians  changed  about the   same  time.  Then  began   riots  against   the   Armenians  in   Constantinople (1890),   and   in   Asia   Minor   quarrels   between  the   Armenians and   Kurds - the   latter  encouraged  by   the   Mussulman authorities  (1893).  A  small  national  Armenian  party  was formed,  directed  by   revolutionary  committees,  partly   composed of   Armenian  subjects  of   Russia.  It   demanded,  not  separation, but   simply   autonomy  for   Armenians  and   guarantees  for   security. The  government  replied  by   condemning  real  or  pretended  revolutionists (1893),   then   by   massacres  (1894-95)  directed  by   the Mussulman  authorities,  executed  by   soldiers  or   hired  assassins. These  massacres  were,   however,  officially  represented  to   Europe as   Armenian  revolts.

At   length,   to   enforce  the   attention  of   Europe,   a   number  of   Armenian revolutionists  made  a  sudden  attack  on  the   Ottoman Bank.  The  government  immediately  ordered  the  massacre  of all   the   Armenians  in   Constantinople  (August,  1896).  In   spite   of the   silence  of   the   newspapers  favourable  to   the   government,  information gathered   on   all   sides   and   reports   of   European   consuls ended  by   rousing  Europe  to   an  outburst  of   indignation  against the   Sultan  and   obliging  the   powers  to   unite  in   a   demand  for   reforms and   guarantees.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.- For  works  in   French:  Lorenz,  "   Catal.  de   la   Libr. Fr."   (analyt.  tables).

DOCUMENTS.- The  official  documents  and  story  of   events  in   the  annuals: "Annual  Register,"  "   Annuaire  Lesur"  and  "Ann.  des  Deux Mondes,"  "   Geschichtskalender,"  the  official  documents  since  1861  in   the "   Staatsarchiv." - Among  the  numerous  records  of   impressions,  see  particularly Von   Moltke,  "   Lettres  sur   la   Turquie,"  tr.   from  the   German,  1877 (sojourn  from  1835  to   1837)  ;   among  political  manifestos,  Midhat-Pasha, "   La   Turquie,  son   Pass6,  son   Avenir,"  1878.

WORKS.- The  best  complete  history  is   E.   Engelhardt,  "   La   Turquie  et le   Tanzimat.  Hist,  des   Reformes  depuis  1826,"  2   vols.,  1882-83,  intelligent and   very  accurate.-  Eosen,  "   Gesch.  der   Tiirkei,"  2   vols.,   1866-67  ("   Staateng.   d.   n.   Z."),   goes   from   1826   to   1856. - Juehereau  de   Saint  Denys,   "   Hist,  de 1'Empire  Ottoman,"  4   vols.,   1844,   stops   at   1844.-  De   la   Jonquiere,  "   Hist,  de 1'Empire  Ottoman,"  1881  ;   popular  edit.,   a   little  confused,  gives   a   bibliog. For   the   crises,   all   of   which  had   a   European  character,  see  the   works

mentioned  under  chaps,  xxv.  to  xxviii.  For  the  Greek  countries  and Crete,  bibl.  may   be   found  in   Hertzberg ;   see   the   bibl.  of   chap.   xxi.

For  the   reign   of   Abdul-Hamid,  F,   Charmes,  "   L'Avenir  de   la   Turquie," 1883;  Georgiades,  "   La   Turquie  Actuelle,"  1892,   and  especially  V.   Berard, "   La   Turquie  et   I'Hellenisme  Contemporain,"  1893,   "   La   Politique  du   Sultan," 1897   (for   Armenian  affairs).  The  best  sources  of   Armenian  affairs are  the   admirable  series  of   English  Consular  Eeports   for   1896   and   following years.

For  Bosnia,  "   Die   Occupation  Bosniens,"  1879-80,  Austrian  official  publication.-" Bosnien  unter  Oesterreichischer-ungarischer  Verwaltung," 1886,   an  anonymous  work,  rose-coloured.

## CHAPTER  XXI.

## THE  CHRISTIAN  NATIONS  OF  THE  BALKANS.

Christian  Nations  of   the  Ottoman  Empire  in  1814. - The European  part  of   the   Ottoman  Empire,  which,  for   want  of   a common  name,  we  call  by   the   two  conventional  terms  European Turkey  and  the  Balkan  Peninsula,  has  always  had,   since  the Middle  Ages,  a   heterogeneous  population,  made  up   of   several peoples  with  sharp   distinctions  of   language,  dress,   and   national feeling.  They   had  bee.n   in   fact   separate  nations,  constituted  as such  long   ago;   the   Ottoman  conquest  of   the   fifteenth  century had  covered  them  up   and   preserved  them  intact;  the   Turks  had settled  only   Roumelia,  the   region   about  Constantinople.

Without  counting  the   Gipsies  and  Jews,   there  were,  in   the Balkan  Peninsula,  five  nations  previous  to   the   coming  of   the Turks,  differing  in   race,*   or  at   least  in   language:  in   the   northwest the   Servians, - in   the   west  the   Albanians, - on   the   south,   in the   islands  and   on   the   coasts,  the   Hellenes, - in   the   north,   on either  side  of   the   Balkans,  the   Bulgarians, - and   north  of   the Danube  the  Roumanians.

The  Albanians,  a  mountain  people,  while  preserving  their national  dress  and   customs  and   even  their  old   language,  Schkipetar,   had   for   the   most  part   become  Mussulmans,  and   consequently a   part   of   the   Ottoman  nation.  They   furnished  a  good   part   of the   officials  and   especially  of   the   soldiers  and   military   officers  of the   Empire.  A   part   of   the   Servians  had   been  converted,  and formed  in   Bosnia  a   Mussulman  aristocracy,  which  preserved  the -Slavonic  tongue  and  national  dress,   but   no   longer   felt   itself  in unison  with  the  greater  part  of   the  nation,  which  was  still Christian.

The  Christian  nations  had  nothing  in   common  but  religion, for   the   two   Slavic  peoples,   Servians  and   Bulgarians,  differed  in

*They  do   not  seem  to   have  really   been  races  in   the  anthropological sense,  that  is,   species  of   men  constituted  with  precise  and  hereditary physical  characteristics;  that  is   evident  in   the   case  of   the   Hellenes,  who have  absorbed  so  many  of   the   Albanians,  not  to   mention  the   Slavs.

language  and   costume.  Except  for   the   Bosnian  Catholics,  all   the Christians  in   European  Turkey  were  Orthodox*  in   communion with  the   Greek  Church  of   Constantinople.  Their  clergy  consisted of   married  priests,   of   little   education,  and   living   in   poverty without  regular  income,  and  of   monks  sworn  to   celibacy.  The bishops,  chosen  from  among  the   monks,  were  the   heads,   not  only of   the   clergy,   but   also   of   the   community.  According  to   the   general custom  of   the   Orthodox  Church,  religion   consisted  mainly of   practices,  ceremonies,  fasting,  and  pilgrimages;  the   clergy seldom  preached  or  gave  religious  instruction,  and  had  little influence  over  the   intellectual  life   of   laymen.

Each  of   these  Christian  nations  formed  a  compact  group  on a   portion   of   territory  which  was  to   become  the   centre  of   a   Christian state.   But   each   had   also   some  of   its   members  settled  outside of   its   principal  territory.  This  gave  rise   to   complications of   two  sorts:

1.   On   the   frontier  of   each  territory,  and   in   the   intervening regions  between  the   national  centres,  the   population  was  a   mixed one,  composed  of   little  national  groups.     This  led   to   conflicts between  the   different  Christian  nations  for   the   possession  of   these undecided  territories.     The  complication  was  especially  inextricable in   the   province  of   Macedonia,  where,  into  a  population mainly  Slavic   (Bulgarian   or    Servian)   Albanian   colonies   and bands  of   Wallachian  shepherds  (Roumanians)  had  introduced themselves;  also  on  the   coasts, and   in   the   cities,   where  a   whole Hellenic  or   Hellenized  population  had  settled.     The   boundaries between  the   Servian  and  Bulgarian  and  the   Greek  districts  were not  only   uncertain,  but   fluctuating;  they   varied  with  the   changes of   population,  which  were  rapid   in   a   country  of   high   birth-rate; also  with  the   progress  of   Hellenization,  for   the   Hellenes  have preserved  the   faculty   of   turning  into   Greeks  the   foreigners  with whom  they   come  in   contact.

2.   Each  of   these  nations  had   outside  of   its   territory  members who  were  subjects  of   one  of   the   great   neighbouring  empires,  but who  preserved  their  religion,  language,  and  a  vague  sentiment of   national  unity.      Thus  the   desire  to   establish  the   unity   of   the whole  nation  brought  conflicts  with  great  neighbouring  states, who  objected  to  any  attempts  at   depriving  them  of   subjects. There  were  Roumanians  in   Transylvania,  in   the   Kingdom  of

*   The   heretical  sects,  the   Gregorians  of   Armenia,  and   the   Nestorians  of Chaldea  and  Syria,  and  the  sects  recognising  Rome,  were  hardly  repre« sented  in   Europe,  outside  of   Constantinople.

Hungary,  in   Bukovina  in   Austria,  in   Bessarabia  in   the   Russian Empire;  Servians  in   Hungary,  Albania,  and  Herzegovina; Greeks  in   the   islands  and   on   the   coast  of   Asia.

In   1814   all   these   Christian  nations  were  subject   to   the   Sultan. They   have  become  independent  during  the   course  of   the   century. The  Eastern  Question  has   not   been  settled  either  by   the   Russian conquest  or   the   reform  of   the   Ottoman  Empire,  but   by   the   separation of   the   Christian  peoples,  who  have  been  organized  into states  on   the   European  model.

The  separation  has  come  by   degrees;  except  for   Greece,  the Christian  states  remained  officially  a  part   of   the   Ottoman  Empire until   1878,   and   the   last-born,  Bulgaria,  is   still   in   that   condition. But   to   understand  their   history,   it   is   better,   without  regard for   official  forms,   to   study   them  separately,  bringing  each   up   to the   beginning  of   its   political   life. tion.

## ROUMANIA.

The  Principalities  of   Moldavia  and  Wallachia  up   to   1856.Of   all   the   Christian  nations  subject   to   the   Sultan,  the   Roumanians had   been   least   affected  by   Ottoman  rule.  The  two  principalities, Wallachia,   the   plain   between  the   Danube  and   the Carpathians,  and  Moldavia,  the   plain   between  the   Carpathians and  the   sea,   had   only   become  tributary  to   the   Sultan.  No   victorious Mussulmans  had   come  in   to   set   themselves  up   over  the Christian  people;  the   principalities  preserved  all   their  social  and political  organization,  their  Christian  aristocracy  of   landowners and  dignitaries  (bo'iars),  their  prince   (Hospodar)  elected  by   the aristocracy,  and   their  Orthodox  clergy.

But  in   the   eighteenth  century  the   Ottoman  government,  suspecting the   Roumanian  hospodars  of   relations  with  the   Tsar,   had adopted  the   custom  of   sending  as   hospodars  Christians  who   were strange  to   the   country.  It   usually   chose  Greeks  from  Phanar, the   Greek  quarter  of   Constantinople,  who  were  rich  enough  to buy   their  nomination,  and   gave   them  but   a   short  term;   between 1716   and   1821  there  were  37   hospodars  in   Wallachia  and   33   in Moldavia.  Since  1774  the  Tsar,  posing  as  protector  of   the Christians,  had   obliged  the   Sultan  to   promise  to   fix   the   tribute and  appoint  the   hospodars  for   seven  years.

During  wars  between  Russia  and  the   Sultan,  the   first  act  of the   Russians  was  always  to   occupy  the   principalities  and   to   organize there   a   provisional  administration  which  lasted  until   their

## PRINCIPALITIES  OF  MOLDAVIA   AND    WALLACHIA.     641

withdrawal.  In   1812  Russia  kept   a   bit   of   Moldavia,  Bessarabia, to   the   left   of   the   Danube.  On   her   withdrawal  in   1834   she   imposed Roumanian  hospodars  of   her   own  choosing  and  left   in force   the   organic   regulation  of   1831,   drawn  up   in   each   principality under  the   direction  of   the   Russian  authorities  by   an  assembly  of boiars  and   bishops. posed

In   both   principalities  political  life   was  still   rudimentary.  The only   cities  were  the   two  residences  of   the   hospodars,  Jassy   in Moldavia  and  Bucharest  in   Wallachia,  and  the   trading  ports  on the   Danube  and  the   Pruth.  The  population  was  composed  almost entirely   of   peasants,  settled  in   the   great   plains;   the   forestcovered  mountains  were  practically  uninhabited.  The  land  was divided  into   great   estates  of   400   to   8000   hectares  (1000   to   20,000 acres),   belonging  to   the   nobles,  very   few   of   whom,  especially  in Wallachia,  resided  on   their  estates,  but   left   them  in   the   hands  of overseers.  The  peasants  were  therefore  only   tenants,  cultivating from   father   to   son  a   lot   which  their  lord   gave   them  in   return for   labour  on  the   part   of   the   estate  reserved  to   himself.  This labour,  fixed  officially  at   12   days   in   1831,   was  often  trebled  in practice.  The  peasants  lived  in   wretched  huts  grouped  in   villages, with   almost   no   furniture,  for   they   could   have   saved   nothing from  pillage   in   that   open  country,  constantly  traversed  by   Russian and   Turkish  armies.*  All   public   life   was  centred  in   the capitals,  where  the   nobles  flocked  to   the   hospodar's  court  to spend  their  income.  Bucharest  had  already  a  population  of 100,000,  palaces,  theatres,  newspapers,  and   carriages.  It   was  an oasis  of   French  civilization  set   in   a   Slavic  and   Oriental  waste; for   the   Roumanians,  a   nation  of   Romanic  language,  were  drawn toward  France;  their  nobles  learned  to  speak   French  and  imported their   luxuries  and   literature  from   Paris.  Political  interest was   furnished  chiefly   by   the   boiars'  complaints  against   the hospodars,  whom  they   accused  of   despotic  government. est

It   was  the   French  revolution  of   1848   that   awoke  the   principalities to   political  life.  The   Roumanian  nobles,  in   their  admiration for   France,  followed  the   example  of   Paris.  The  nobles  of   Moldavia demanded  a   constitution  from  their  hospodar  Stourdza,

*   Von   Moltke,  who  saw   Wallachia  in   1835,   described  it   as  a   desert  plain, showing  neither  castles,  bridges,  mills,   inns,   gardens,  nor  trees;  not  even villages,  for   these  are   hidden  and  formed  of   low  huts.  The  people  are unarmed  and  bow  down  before  any  well-dressed  man.  In   the   houses there  are  neither  dishes,  furniture,  nor  provisions;  the   Wallachian  carries his   knife,   pipe,   and   tobacco  on   his   person,   leaving  nothing  in   his   house.

who  replied  by   ordering  them  out  of   the   country;  attempts  were made  to  assassinate  him.  In   Wallachia,  the   malcontents,  aided by   the   people   of   Bucharest,  forced  Bibesco,  the   hospodar,  to sign   a   constitution;  then,   when  he   fled   the   country,  they   set  up a   provisional  government.  But  the   Tsar  interfered  to  support his   proteges,  the   hospodars,  and   to   put   down  the   revolution.  A Russian  army  took  possession  of   Moldavia  in   July,   then  Wallachia,   where  a   Turkish  army   had   already   seized  Bucharest.  The Tsar  and   the   Sultan  arranged  by   the   treaty  of   Balta-Liman,  May, 1849,   to   replace   the   two   hospodars  with   successors  appointed  for seven  years  only,   and   to   restore  the   organic   regulation  of   1831, with  the   promise  to   have  it   revised.

The  war  between  the   Tsar  and   the   Sultan  overthrew  this   combination. When   the   Russian  army,   in   1854,   evacuated  the   principalities, Austria   occupied   them   until   the   peace,   in   1856. bination.

Formation  of   the  State  of   Roumania  (1856-66).- The  Roumanian state   was   the   work   of   the   European  governments.  The Congress  of   Paris,   in   order  to   keep   Russia  from  monopolizing the   protection  of   the   Roumanians,  put   both  principalities  under the   collective  guarantee  of   the   powers.  The  Sultan  promised to   leave  them  complete  independence  in   internal  administration; as   he   had   already,   in   1829,   given   up   his   fortresses  and   garrisons there,   his   sovereignty  was  reduced  in   practice  to   exacting  a   tribute and   forbidding  independent  foreign   relations.  Moldavia  recovered that   part   of   Bessarabia  which  was  taken  away   from Russia  in   order  to   keep   her   from  the   Danube.  A   European commission  was  appointed  to   organize  the   two  countries,  assisted by   two  councils  (divans)  elected  by   the   inhabitants.

Two  parties  were  formed  on  the   final  organization.  Napoleon III.   wished  to   see   the   Roumanian  nation  united,  as   did   also   the great  majority  of   the   Roumanians.  The  Ottoman  and  Austrian governments  preferred  to   keep   the   two  principalities  separate; this  system  was  advocated  by   a  number  of   Moldavians,  who feared  the   supremacy  of   Bucharest.  The  provisional  governors appointed  by   the   Sultan  managed  the   elections  so  as  to   have non-unionists  elected  in   Moldavia.  But  France  intervened  and obliged  the   Sultan  to   quash   the   election;  the   partisans  of   unity were  then  elected.

In   October,  1857,   the   two  councils  of   Moldavia  and   Wallachia asked  for   union  in   a   single   principality  of   Roumania,  with  a   foreign prince.   The   Sultan  refused  and   declared  the   councils  dissolved; Napoleon   supported  the   Roumanians.  Finally,  at   the

Paris  Conference,  a   compromise  was  effected:  the   principalities kept   their   two  governments,  two  elective  hospodars,  and  two representative  assemblies;  but,   in   1858,   they   became  the   United Principalities  of   Moldavia  and   Wallachia,  with  a   common  commission of   1  6   members  for   common  affairs  and  a   common  court of   justice.

The  complete  union  was  established  by   an  expedient.  The two  assemblies  agreed,  in   1859,   to   elect  the   same  hospodar,  a Moldavian  boi'ar  named  Couza,  who  was  proclaimed  under  the title   of   Alexander  L,   "   Prince  of   Roumani'a."  The   Sultan  finally recognised  this   as  a   title   for   life,   in   1861.  Couza  then   announced by   a   proclamation:  "The  Roumanian  nation  is   founded."  The two  ministries  retired  and   were  replaced  by   a  single   ministry. The   two  assemblies  were  merged  into  a   single   National  Assembly in   Bucharest  in   1862.  Henceforth  the   Roumanian  state  had a   government  and   a   capital.

The   formation  of   the   union  was  accompanied  by   violent  political agitations  and   a   permanent  conflict  between  the   prince   and the   Assembly.  The   constitutional  system,  though   officially  established, was   not   put   in   operation.  The   prince   governed  despotically, without   a   regular   budget,   and   changing  his   ministers  from personal  motives  (twenty  ministries  in   seven  years).  The  Assembly voted   an   address  claiming   the   constitutional  system,  then refused  to   vote  the   budget   until  the   ministry  recognised  its   financial rights.   The   prince   closed  the   Assembly,  and   appointed  himself commander-in-chief  (1863).  The  Assembly,  at   its   next meeting,  passed  a   vote  of   lack   of   confidence  against   the   ministry, then  refused  to   discuss  the   budget.  The  prince   made  a  coup d'etat,   copied   after   Napoleon  III.;   he   declared  the   Assembly  dissolved, took   possession  of   the   hall,   suspended  the   press   law,   and promulgated  a  statute  establishing  universal  suffrage,  a   Senate, and  a   Chamber.  He   had  it   ratified  by   a   plebiscite  by   universal suffrage,  620,000  ayes  against  1307  nays;   he   even  exacted  approval of   the   new  system   from  his   officials,  on  pain   of   dismissal. Then,  in   1864,   under  pretext  of   a   conspiracy,  he   had   the   leaders of   the   constitutional  party  arrested.  After  that  he   pursued  a masterful  policy,   decreeing  the   budget,  having   his   official  candidates elected,   and   reducing  the   function  of   the   legislature  to mere  registration  of   his   decisions.  He   had  himself  declared hereditary  prince   in   1865,   and   having   no  children  he   designated his   successor. self

The  Assembly  represented  in   this  conflict,  not  the   entire  na-

## 644  THE   CHRISTIAN  NATIONS  OF   THE  BALKANS.

tion,   but   the   Roumanian  nobility,  the   only   part   of   the   nation  of sufficient  education  to   take  part   in   political  life;   the   mass  of   the nation  remained  inactive.  Alexander  attempted,  like  Napoleon III.,   to   pose  as  a   democratic  sovereign.  The  Paris  Convention imposed  on  the   Roumanians  the   obligation  of   abolishing  all   class privileges  and   "   proceeding  without  delay   to   the   revision  of   the law   regulating  the   relations  of   landlords  with  the   farmers,  with a   view   to   bettering  the   condition  of   the   peasants."  The   Assembly had   been   unable  to   agree  on   the   reform,   and   the   prince   made it   by   decree,   in   August,   1864.   The   peasants  received  as   their own  property  the   land  they   possessed  as   tenants,  and   were  freed from  compulsory  labour,  paying  instead  an   indemnity  to  the great   landlords.  The  government  assumed  charge  of   the   transaction, expropriating  the   landowners,  but   leaving   them  at   least a   third   of   their   property  and   giving   them  a   compensation.  The land  was   distributed  among  the   peasants  in   lots   proportioned  to their  live   stock.  They   were  to   pay   for   it   in   annual  instalments spread  over  15   years.  Four  hun'dred  thousand  families  became proprietors.

Alexander  was  detested  by   the   people  of   Bucharest.  The Roumanian  nobles  took  advantage  of   this  to   rid   the   country  of him  by   a   plot.   The   conspirators  surprised  him   in   his   sleeping apartments,  forced  him   to   abdicate,  and   set   up   a   provisional  government which   convoked  the   Chambers  to   elect  a   new  prince. The  Roumanians  were  convinced  that  their  country  could  not   be governed  by   a   Roumanian  prince,   as   the   great   families  could  not bear  to   yield   obedience  to   one  of   their  own  rank.  They   therefore agreed   to   invite  a   foreign   prince.   The   Chambers  elected first   a   Belgian   prince,   who   refused.  A   German  prince   of   the Catholic  branch  of   the   Hohenzollerns  became  Charles  I.   of   Roumania  (1866).

The  Constitutional  Monarchy. - With  the   accession  of   Prince Charles  a   regular   political   life   began.   The   Constitution  of   1866 established  in   Roumania  a   liberal  system  like  that  in   Belgium (jury   trial,   national  guard,   liberty   of   press  and   of   public   meeting), and   the   machinery  of   the   government  of   the   constitutional monarchies,  a   responsible  ministry  chosen  by   the   King,   a   parliament consisting  of   two   houses,  both  chosen  by   voters  divided into   groups   by   a   system  similar  to   the   Prussian  classes:  a   Senate of   120  members,  of   which  no  are  elected  from  among  the   property owners  by   two  groups  of   propertied  voters,  and   a   Chamber of   Deputies   of   178   members,  elected  by   almost  universal  but   un-

equal   suffrage  - the   voters  acting   in   four   groups,  of   which  the last   includes  all   taxpayers.  The  country  was  organized  on  the French  system  of   departments  and  districts,  administered  by prefects  and  subprefects;  with  centralized  services,  a   Court  of Accounts,  and  legal   codes  copied   from  France.

The  former  parties  began  to   dispute  for   possession  of   the power.  Their  chief  points   of   difference  were  on   foreign  policy and  social  tendencies.  The  White  or   Conservative  party,  composed of   the   great   landowners  and   called  the   "   Boiar  party,"   was Russia's  party,   hostile  to   the   foreign   prince   and   ill-disposed  toward reform.  The   Red   or   Liberal  party   wanted  government  by the   middle  class  and   alliance  with  Germany  and  Austria.  The leader  of   the   Liberal  party,   John   Bratiano,  gained   for   himself  the name  of   Roumanian  Bismarck.  Between  the   two,  as   the   result of   personal  rivalries,  arose  a   third  party,  the   "   Young   Right," whose  efforts  were  chiefly   directed  against  Bratiano's  administration. A   group  of   dissenters  detached  itself  from  the   Liberal party,   led   by   a   brother  of   Bratiano;  also   another  group  under Rosetti,  favouring  universal  suffrage.  The  struggles  and  coalitions between  these   groups  made  parliamentary  life   animated  and complicated.

Charles  I.,   who,   until   he   became  prince,   had   been  an  officer  in the   Prussian  army,   busied  himself  chiefly   with  the   army  and   with foreign  policy.  He  always  observed  very  nearly  the  parliamentary principle,   governing  with   ministers  supported  by   the majority  in   the   Chambers.  But   it   is   plain   that   in   Roumania  the ministry  has   such  control  over  the   elections  that  the   sovereign may   in   many  cases  make  the   majority  by   calling   to   the   ministry the   party   he   prefers.  Charles  I.,   naturally  leaning  toward  the Liberals,  who  favoured  the   German  alliance,  began   with  a   Liberal ministry   under  Bratiano,  and   kept   the   Liberal  party   in   office except  when  the   united  oppositions  became  too  strong.

One  of   the   great   difficulties  was   in   the   financial  organization  ; the   country  had  already  a   heavy   debt,   amounting  to  almost $160,000,000,  and  a  chronic  deficit  which  went  on   for   twenty years.  The  state  lands  were  sold,   a  government  monopoly  in tobacco  introduced,  the   currency  was  reformed  and  placed  on the   decimal  system.  Bratiano's  program  included  the   development of   the   country's  economic  resources  by   establishing  railroads and   schools.  But   the   Liberal  party   was  still   too  weak  to keep   itself  in   power.  The  Roumanian  sympathy  with  France made  the   position  of   a   Hohenzollern  prince   a   very   difficult  one,

as   long   as   France  and   Prussia  were  on  such  bad   terms.  The Conservatives  gained  the   majority  in   the   Chambers.  Charles  I., feeling  himself  unpopular,  resigned  himself  to  a   Conservative ministry,  but  occasionally  tried  to   restore  Bratiano  until  1868. Roumania  went  through  a  period  of   severe  struggles  interspersed with   outbreaks.  In   1870   the   Chamber  officially  expressed its   sympathy  with  France,  and  the   prince   talked  of   abdicating ; *   a   demonstration  in   honour  of   the   German  victory in   March,  1871,   led   to   a   riot   in   Bucharest.  Finally   by   means  of a   dissolution  a   Chamber  was  secured  that   was  willing   to   support a   compromise  Conservative  ministry  under  Catargi,  who  consented to   govern   in   harmony  with   the   prince.   Order  was  restored, and   the   Catargi   ministry   remained  in   office  until  1876. For   the   first   time   a   Chamber  lived   out   its   term.

Charles  I.   laboured  to   build  up   an  army  on  the  Prussian model.  He  obtained  a  compulsory  three-year  service;  but,   as the   budget   would  not  permit   the   enrollment  of   the   whole  contingent, it   was  divided  into  two  sections,  a  standing  army   for three  years  and   a   reserve,  the   dorobanze,  called  out   for   periodical practice.  It   thus  formed  an  army  of   nearly   150,000  men  in   time of   war,  provided  with  modern  artillery  imported  from  Germany. This  Roumanian  army  was  to  play   a   decisive  part   in   the   war against  the   Turks.

The  prince's  position  was  strengthened.  When  the  crisis  of the  Ottoman  Empire  set  in,   Charles  I.   found  himself  strong enough  to   pursue  a  national  policy.  His   plan   was  to   free   Roumania from   Turkish  sovereignty,  which  still   made  itself  felt   in many  offensive  ways.  The  Porte  refused  to  call  the   country Roumania,  to  recognise  her  diplomatic  agents  in   Turkey,  or   to let   them  settle  the   affairs  of   Roumanian  subjects.  Charles  I. then  shook  off   the   Conservative  party  and,   after  trying   a   mixed ministry,  took  a   Liberal  ministry  under  Bratiano  in   1876,   which, with  a  short  interruption  in   1881  and  several  reconstructions, lasted  until  1888.

Roumania,  having  entered  the   war  against  the   Sultan,  joined forces  with  Russia,  who  promised  her   the   integrity  of   her   territory. But   in   the   peace   Russia  took  Roumanian  Bessarabia, which  she   needed  in   order  to   reach  the   left   bank  of   the   Danube;

*   In   a   private   letter  dated  1871   he   complains  of   the   inexperience  of   the Roumanian  people,  who  have  "   jumped  from  a   despotic  system  to   a  most liberal  constitution,"  and  who  "   have  not  the  necessary  strength  of   character for   an   almost  republican  form  of   government."

in   exchange  she  made  the  Sultan  cede  to  Roumania  the Dobrudsha,  a   fertile  but   unhealthy  and   deserted  country.  Roumania appealed   to   the   Congress  of   Berlin,   but   secured  only   a slight   increase  of   compensation.

The  war  made  Roumania  a  sovereign  state.  Her  independence, which   had   been   proclaimed  by   the   Roumanian  Chambers as  early   as  1877,   was  officially  recognised  by   the   Sultan  and   the Congress,  but   on  the   condition  of   granting  legal   equality  without religious   distinctions;  this   related  to   the   Jews   of   Moldavia, who  numbered  nearly  300,000,  and  had  hitherto  been  excluded from  political  rights.  The  title   of   prince   was  replaced  by   that of   King   in   1881.

The  Kingdom  of   Roumania  was  still,   however,  far   from  including the   whole  Rouman  stock.  Not  to   mention  the   Wallachian shepherd's  and   Roumanish  communities  scattered  through  Bulgaria, Servia,   and   Macedonia,  there  remained  a   half   million  of Roumans  in   Bessarabia,  2,500,000  in   Hungary  and   Transylvania, and  200,000  in   Bukovina.  A   party   has   been  formed  to   deliver unredeemed  Roumania  (Roumania  irredenta).  It   has  put   itself in   communication  with  the   outside  Roumans,  especially  those  in Hungary,  and  has  made  'sundry  demonstrations  against  which the   Hungarian  government  has  publicly  protested.

On   the   other  hand  an   Orthodox  Russian  movement  has   been made  among  the  clergy  by   the   priests   educated  in   the   Russian seminary  of   Kiev,  and  among  the   peasants,  by   the   popes  and peddlers  of  patriotic  Russian  emblems.  The  Roumanian Church,  governed  by   a  synod   of   its   own  bishops,  under  the   direction of   lay   officers,  has   been  declared  wholly   independent  of the   Greek  Patriarch  of   Constantinople.  This  led   to   an   Orthodox agitation,   aimed  in   reality   against   the   King,   on  account  of his   being   a   Catholic.  In   order  to   calm  the   discontent  the   King had  his   nephew  and   heir,   Prince  Ferdinand,  brought  into  Roumania; this   prince   has   himself  remained  a   Catholic,  but   has   had his   son   baptized  in   the   Orthodox  faith  (1893).

The  Liberal  ministry  went  on   building  railroads  and   establishing schools  and   supporting  the   King's   military   enterprise  of   turning Bucharest  into  a  great   fortified  camp.  The  ministry  attempted an   agrarian   reform.  In   1884   it   procured  a   revision  of the   Constitution,  abolishing  the   national  guard,   and   making  the suffrage  more  democratic  by   suppressing  the   separate  group  of 3OOO-franc  electors.  A   small  socialist  party  was   formed,  having its   centre  at   Bucharest  and   seeking   to   gain   the   support  of   the ing

peasants  who  were  disappointed  in   their  expectation  of   receiving lands.

The  Liberal  party,  weakened  by   the  divisions  among  its leaders,  was  overthrown  by   the   agitation  produced  by   the   new understanding  between  France  and  Russia.  The  Conservative party  accused  it   of   having   made  the   Roumanian  army  a   part   of the   German  army,  and  with  having  allied  itself  to   the   enemies of   France.  The  Conservatives  obtained  a   majority  in   the   Chamber and   even  voted  to   impeach  the   Bratiano  ministry  (1889).

After  the   experiment  of   a   coalition  ministry  of   seceding  Liberals and   young   Conservatives,  the   King,   in   1889,   went  back  to Conservative  ministries,  with  a  sprinkling  of   Liberal-Conservtives;   these  ministries  lasted  until  1895.   At   that   time,   Bratiano being  dead,  the  Liberal  party  regained  the  majority  and  the ministry  (Stourdza,  1895;   Aurelian,  1896).

The  industrial  advance  of   the   country  has   continued.  If   the debt  has   increased,  it   has   been  for   the   construction  of   state  railroads. The   credit   of   the   government  has   been   strengthened  and its   bonds  have  risen  in   price.

## GREECE.

The   Greek  Nation  before  1820. - Greece,  conquered  by   the   Ottomans, placed   under   Mussulman  governors,  and   held   down  by Mussulman  garrisons,  had  nothing  corresponding  to  a  national organization.  The  Greeks,  since  the   Middle  Ages,   did   not   form a  single   nation.  The  Greek  Church  was  common  to  all   the Orthodox,  so   that   outsiders  made  no   distinction  between  Greeks and  Slavs.  But  the  Greek  langauge  had  been  preserved,  and this,   combined  with  memories  of   ancient  Greece,  was  enough  to keep   alive   the   thought   of   an   Hellenic  nation.  All   the   Christians who  spoke   Greek,  not  only   descendants  of   the   Hellenes,  but   also the   Hellenized  Albanians  and   Slavs,   felt   themselves  to   be   members of   one  and   the   same  illustrious  race,   to   which  it   was  glorious to   belong.

The  renascence  of   the   Hellenic  nation  became  manifest  at   the end  of   the   eighteenth  century.  Under  the   Sultan  Selim,  who favoured  his   Christian  subjects,  the   Greeks  had   grown   in   numbers, wealth,   and   civilization.  They   had   established  the   manufacture of   silk   and   of   cotton,  especially  in   Thessaly.  They   had taken  advantage  of   the   European  wars  to   build  up   a   merchant marine  under  the   flag   of   Turkey,  which  remained  neutral.  They

carried  on  almost  the   whole  exportation  of   Russian  grain   from Odessa  and  a   large   share  of   European  commerce  in   the   Levant. Being   good   and   courageous  sailors,  they   made  quick   voyages  at slight   expense,  for   the   crew  consisted  of   the   relatives  of   the owner  and  shared  in   the   profits.  It   was  said   in   1816   that   they had  about  600  vessels  and  17,000  sailors;  they   had   established colonies  of   Greek  merchants  in   the   chief  ports   of   the   Mediterranean (Marseilles,  Leghorn,  Trieste,  and   Odessa)  and   even  in London  and  Liverpool.

By   contact  with  the   civilized  countries  the   Greeks  advanced in   civilization.  Their  merchants,  enriched  by   the   new  trade, founded  schools  for   the   instruction  of   Greek  youth   at   Bucharest, Corfu,   and   Constantinople.  The   Greek  language,  debased by   centuries  of   barbarism,  began   to   recover  its   purity.  By   the labour?  of   Corai,   a   practical  compromise  was   found  between  the vulgar  tongue  and  classical  Greek.

Through  education  the   Greeks  became  conscious  of   their  nationality. The   French  Revolution  aroused  them ; *   later  the destruction  of   the   Republic  of   Venice  created,  in   the   Ionian  Isles, an   Hellenic  centre  independent  of   the   Sultan.  These  France erected  into   the   Republic  of   the   Seven  Isles.  After  their  capture by   England  they   were  placed   under  an   English  governor  with a   special   administration  (1815).

The  Greeks  were  scattered  all   over  the   Ottoman  Empire,  on the   coasts  and   in   the   large   cities.  But   a   compact   Greek  population, in   the   southern  part   of   European  Turkey,  occupied  Morea, Romaic  (central  Greece),  Thessaly,  and  the   islands.  There  were among  them  Albanian  and  Slavic  Christians  who  were  rapidly becoming  Hellenized.  In  these  regions  there  were  Hellenic groups  with  enough  strength  of   organization  to   have  thoughts of   national  independence.

In   Morea,  where  there  were  few   Mussulmans,  each  Christian community  was  administered  by   its   own  notables;  for   the   country as   a   whole  the   assembly  of   primates,  elected  by   delegates from  the   communes,  met  each  year  with  the   Mussulman  Pasha at   Tripolitza.  In   Maina  (ancient  Laconia)  the   mountaineers,  the Mainotes,  remained  armed,  with  leaders  entrenched  in   strong castles  and   carrying  on  petty   warfare  with   one  another.

*   Rhigas,  the   Greek  patriot   of   Thessaly,  composed  a   national  hymn: "   Rise,  sons  of   Greece,  the   time  of   deliverance  is   nigh."  The   Austrian police   handed  him  over  to   the   Pasha  of   Belgrade,  who   had   him   drowned (1798).

In   the   mountains  of   central  Greece  and   Epirus   the   Christians, Hellenes,  and  Albanians  formed  an   irregular  militia,  the   Pallicares,  who  kept   their  national  dress  and  their  national  leaders, the   Armatoles.  But  since  the   Turkish  government,  distrusting the  Christian  armatoles,  had  excited  Albanian  Mussulmans against  them,  the   Pallicares  had  retired  to   the   mountains  and become  Klephts  or   brigands.  They   defied  the   Turkish  authorities and   were  the   national  heroes  of   the   Hellenes;  they   fought in   small  bands,  usually   with  guns,  which  they   fired  from  behind rocks.  There  were  no  sailors  then  except  in   the   islands,  where the   Greek  population  was  allowed  to   govern   itself,   paying   taxes to   Turkey.  Almost  all   the   seafaring  population  was  concentrated on   three   bare   and   barren  rocks,   the   Nautical  Isles,   in   the Argolic  Gulf.  The  largest   of   these  was   Hydra,   where  the   people, though  wearing  the   Greek  dress,   were  still   Albanian  and   spoke   the Albanian  language;  it   had  a   population  of   40,000,  crowded  into 3000  stone  houses  built  in   the   shelter  of   a   high   bluff.  The   community was   aristocratic,  only   the   landowning  "   primates   "   could vote  in   choosing  the   12   demogeronies  (elders   of   the   people)   who governed  the   island.  Spezzia,  which  was  peopled  by   half-Hellenized  Albanians,  was  less  populous,  less  rich,   and   less   aristocratic, with   fewer   "   primates  "   and   less   powerful  families.  Psara, the   smallest  of   the   islands,   was  altogether  Greek  and   democratic. All   three  lived  like   small  republics,  with  the   condition  of   sending presents  to   the   dignitaries  of   the   Turkish  navy.

Their  ships,   armed  with  cannon  for   defence  against  the   Barbary   pirates,   manned  by   semi-martial  sailors,  formed  a   veritable navy.  The  general  peace,  by   putting  an  end  to   the   privileged situation  of   the   Turkish  flag,   had  reduced  the   sailors  of   the Nautical  Isles  to   inaction  and   disposed  them  to   throw  themselves into  adventures.

Formation  of   the  Kingdom  of   Greece  (1820-29). - In   1820 Greece  had  warriors  armed  and  ready  to   fight:   the  Morean mountaineers  and  Pallicares,  and   the   sailors  of   the   Nautical  Isles. Her  opportunity  came  when  the  revolt  of   a   Mussulman  governor, Ali,   Pasha   of   Janina,   set   the   example  of   insurrection. The   Greeks  revolted  at   once  in   Epirus,   Morea,  and   the   islands.

In   Morea  the   "   primates  "   sent  to   Tripolitza  to   check  the   rising judged   it   more  prudent   to   join   the   rebels.  The   Mainotes came  down  from  the   mountains  and  the   Archbishop  of   Patras called  his   flock   to   arms.  In   three  weeks  the   Mussulmans  had lost   everything  but   the   capital,  Tripolitza.  The  Christian  in-

surgents,  led   by   Kolokrotoni,  a   Klepht,  blockaded  the   city   and finally   massacred  the   Mussulmans  (1821).  This  was  from  the first   a   war  of   race  and   religion,   a   war  of   extermination,  in   which prisoners  and   even  women  and  children  were  massacred  on   both sides.  The  war  was  long   and  widespread,  full  of   dramatic episodes  which  were  sung   by   the   poets  and  became  famous  all over  Europe.  It   was  a  period   of   coercion  in   ail   the   European countries;  the   newspapers,  forbidden  to   concern  themselves  with domestic  affairs,  were  full   of   the   exploits   of   the   Greek  heroes.

In   fact   the   fate   of   Greece  did   not   depend   on   the   insurgents, who  were  too   few   to   resist  all   the   forces  of   the   Ottoman  Empire ; it   depended  on  the   Christian  powers  of   Europe.  But  the   insurgents' resistance  gave   the   public   opinion   of   Europe   time   to compel  the   governments  to   intervene.  It   took  six   years   to   do   it. The  insurrection  was  entirely  stamped  out  in   Epirus,  Thessaly,   and   Crete  (1823-24),  after  a   number  of   massacres.  It   centred itself   in   the   three  regions  that   were  to   form  the   Kingdom  of Greece:  Morea,  the  Islands,  and  central  Greece.  The  Greeks held  out  there  for   four  years,  1821  to   1825;   they   drove  back  a Turkish  army   in   Morea  in   1823,   and   destroyed  a   Turkish  fleet in   1824;   their  methods  were  those  of   guerrilla  warfare - ambuscades on   land,   fireships  at   sea.

The  Greeks  had  as   leader,  at   first,   a   young  nobleman,  Demetrius Ypsilanti,   who   came  to   their  assistance  with  his   followers and   his   black  flag   bearing   the   design   of   a   phoenix   (see   p. 619)   ; he was  called  the   Archstr  ate   gist.   A   national  assembly  met  in   the woods  near  Epidaurus  and  proclaimed  the  independence  of Greece.  It   formed  governments  of   notables  (gerousies),  two   for central  Greece  and  one   for   Morea,  with  a   common  central  government for   the   whole.  But   the   Greeks,  who  grudged  obedience to   an  outsider,  soon  got   rid   of   the   band  of   followers  and   the phoenix.  They   then  broke  into  two  parties - on  one  side  the Morean  primates  and  the   people   of   the   Nautical  Isles,   favouring European  civilization,  and   directed  by   Maurokordato,  who  wore a   black  coat  and   an  eye-glass ;   on   the   other  the   Morean  warriors under  Kolokotroni,  the   Klepht.  The  Klephts  at   first   drove  out the   legislative  assembly,  and   each  party   had   its   own  government  ; then  they   fought  each  other,  and  the   civilized  party  prevailed. After  this  they   divided  into  primates  and   Nauticals,  and   went on   fighting  (1823).

At   length,   in   1825,   two   Mussulman  armies  invaded  Greece  at once.  One,  coming  by   land  from  the   north,   besieged  Misso-

longhi,   and   made  the   famous  assault  and   massacre  in   1826.  The other,  under  Ibrahim,  came  from  Egypt  by   sea,   landed  in   the south,  and   regained  Morea.  The  struggle  went  on   between  the primate  party,  friendly  to   England,  and  the  warrior  party, friendly  to   Russia.  Each  had  its   assembly.  They   decided  to join   in   a   single   assembly,  which  made  the   Constitution  of   Troezen  and  elected  for   seven  years  a   head  of   the   government  (Kybernetes) ; they   chose  Capodistrias,  an   Ionian,  an  agent   of   Russia, with  an   English  admiral-in-chief  and  general-in-chief.  After the   Turks  took  the   Acropolis,  in   June,   1827,   the   insurgents  had nothing  left   but   some  forts,   without  ammunition,  provisions,  or money.

Greece,  which  was  already  in   Mussulman  hands  again,   was   delivered by   the   European  powers.  (On   the   negotiations  and   the succeeding  war,  see  chap,   xxv.)  The  governments  of   England, Russia,  and  France  had  finally  decided  to   interfere.  They meant  only   to   intimidate  the   Sultan  and   make  him  give   Greece an  autonomous  government;  their  fleets  came  to   Greece  only   to compel  Ibrahim's  army  to   withdraw  (1827).  But  the   battle  of Navarino,  which  came  on  against  the   wish  of   the   governments, obliged  them  to  active  intervention.  A   French  army  took Morea  from  the   Turks  once  more  (1828),  and  the   next  year  a Russian  army   forced  the   Sultan  to   accept  the   decisions  of   the powers.  The  London  Conference  created  an   independent  Kingdom of   Greece,  eventually  suppressing  the   tribute  money  which, according  to   its   first   plan,   was  to   be   paid   to   the   Sultan.  But   it did   not   wish   to   found  a   true   Greek  nation.  The   territory  of   the Kingdom  was  made  up,  not  of   all   the   countries  having   a   Greek population,  but   only   of   those  that   were  still   in   insurrection  in 1825:   that   is   to   say,   Morea,   central  Greece,  and   the   European islands.  The  King   was  to   be   a   European  prince,   and   they   were long   in   finding   him.  Leopold  of   Coburg,  who   later   became  King of   Belgium,  refused  the   invitation  in   1830.

The  Absolutist  System  (1829-43). - Meanwhile  Capodistrias was  governing  despotically  and   insulting  the   Greeks.  "   You  are all   of   you,"   he   said,   "   brigands  and  liars."  The  people   of   Hydra revolted,  seized  the   Greek  ships   and   burned  them.  The  Mauromichalis,  the   chief  family   of   the   Mainotes,  revolted.  Capodistrias had   the   head   of   the   family   imprisoned  and   was   himself assassinated  in   October,  1831.  His  brother  tried  to  succeed him,   but   the   malcontents  formed  a   government  which  made  war on   him   and   forced  him   to   flee.  At   length,   in   Otto,   son  of   Louis,

the   King   of   Bavaria,  a   prince   was   found  who   had   no  connection with   any   of   the   great   rival   powers  and   was  an  admirer  of   Greece. The  Greece  resulting  from  this   war  and   diplomacy  was  a   small and   poverty-stricken  state  (750,000  souls).  It   lacked  the   richest Greek  region,  Thessaly,  and  the   principal  island,  Crete.  The country  left   to   it   was   laid   waste  and   depopulated  by   a   war  of extermination  drawn  out  through  10  years.  It   was  still  full   of armed  bands  (the   semi-brigand  Pallicares);  it   was  without  resources, and   was   burdened  already   with   a   usurious  debt   contracted in   1824-25.  The  Greek  nation  has   spent  all   the   rest  of this   century  in   renewing  its   population,  restoring  its   land  to cultivation,  ridding  itself  of   brigands,  and   trying   to   increase  its territory,  and   improve  its   financial  condition.  It   has   had   but   a slow  and   partial   success  in   a   task  so  out  of   proportion  to   its resources.  The  European  public,  which  knew  little  of   the   actual condition  of   the   country,  expected  a   brilliant  renaissance  of   ancient Greece.  The   disillusionment  which  followed  this   philhellenic enthusiasm  produced  a   feeling   of   derisive  contempt  which the  obvious  progress  of   Greece  has  not  yet   altogether  dissipated.

The  Greeks  were  a  people  of   peasants,  sailors,  and   warriors, with  democratic  customs,  but   accustomed  to   rally   around  popular chiefs.  In   this   mountainous  country,  without  roads  and almost  without  cities,  the   only   public   life   was  municipal  life. Over  this   still   semi-barbaric  people   was  placed   a   European  government. King   Otto,   who   was  still   a   minor,   brought   with   him a   Bavarian  regent  who  governed  until  his   majority;  also'   a   Bavarian ministry,   Bavarian  officials,  and   a   small  army  of   Bavarian volunteers.  He   himself,  still   a   Catholic  and   a   German,  brought to   his   task   the   ideas   and   methods  of   personal  government.  Political life   began  with  the   Greek  Orthodox  antipathy  to   the   foreign Catholics,  with   the   dissatisfaction  of   the   Greek  pallicares, incorporated  in   an  army  with  the   German  uniform;  with  the ravages  of   the   disbanded  pallicares  who  had   become  klephts   with the   Mainote  revolt  (1835),  and   finally   with  the   irritation  of   the clergy  against  the   organization  of   the   Greek  Church  under  a synod  of   5   prelates  and  a   lay   proctor  on  the   Russian  model. The  government  succeeded,  however,  in   organizing  some  of   the institutions  of   a  civilized  state:  a   capital,   at   Athens  instead  of Nauplia,  in   1834,  - a  gendarmerie  in   1833,  - an  administration like   that   in   France,  10   nomes  with   prefects,   42   eparchies  with   subprefects  and   communes  under  demarchs  practically  appointed  by

## 654           THE  CHRISTIAN  NATIONS  OF  THE  BALKANS.

the   government, - a   Council  of   State,   composed  of   the   principal Greeks,  in   1835,  - the   University  of   Athens  in   1837,   which  became a   centre  of   learning  and   patriotism  for   the   whole  Hellenic world, - a   national  bank  in   1841.

Greek  politics  were  entirely  controlled  by   its   dependence  on the   three   European  powers  that   had   established  the   kingdom  and advanced  the   money  necessary  for   its   organization,  in   the   form of   a   loan   of   $12,000,000  guaranteed  by   all   three.  Each  had   its party.  Russia  supported  the  Napists,  Capodistrias'  former party,  recruited  among  the   clergy   and   the   Orthodox  believers, chiefly  in   Morea;  France  favoured  the  Coletti  party,  whose power  was  in   central  Greece;  England,  the   Maurokordato  and Tricoupis  party,  composed  chiefly  of   the   islanders.  All   three, struggling  against  the   Bavarian  court  and  government,  agreed on  a  revolution.  The  Russian  party  wished  to   drive  out  the King   and   replace   him   with  an   Orthodox  prince;   the   two  others, to   impose   a   constitution  upon   him.  They   took  advantage  of   the government's  financial  embarrassment.  England  and  Russia, by   demanding  interest  on  the   loan  and   reduction  of   expenses  in 1843,   forced  the   King   to   disband  his   Bavarian  soldiers.  The Greek  soldiers  then  revolted;  the   defenceless  King   dismissed  his ministers,  convoked  a   national  assembly  (1843),   an&lt;3   accepted  the Constitution  of   1844.  This  was  a   liberal  European  constitution with  a   responsible  ministry  and   two   houses,  a   Senate  chosen  by the   King,   and   a   Chamber  of   Deputies  elected,  by   universal  suffrage, for   three  years,  and   receiving  salaries.

Greece  under  the   Constitutional  System. - The  King,   in   his subsequent  isolation,  was  obliged  to   make  honest  application  of the   parliamentary  system.  Greece,  alone  among  the   new  Balkan states,   has   been   governed  by   ministers  who  are  really   subjected to   the   will   of   the   majority,  resigning  under  a   hostile  vote  of   the Chamber  or  the   people.

This  essentially  democratic  society,  without  religious  passions, and   but   little   influenced  by   the   clergy,   had   no  sufficiently  sharp distinctions  to   make  real  parties.  But  as  ways  of   making  a career  are   few,   employment  scarce,  and  higher  education  confined to   the   upper  classes,  there  are  too  many  politicians  and candidates  for   office  for   so  poor  a   country.  This  causes  sharp competition  in   elections  to   the   Chamber  and  in   the   Chamber continuous  struggles  for   possession  of   the  ministerial  offices. Greece  is   remarkable  for   the   intensity  of   her   political  passions, shown  in   electoral  struggles  by   administrative  pressure,  frauds,

and   riots   in   connection  with  the   ballot,  and   by   the   violence  of the   parliamentary  debates  and   newspaper  articles.

At   first   the   contention  for   possession  of   power   lay   between  the old   parties.  The  advantage  remained  with  the  English  and French  parties,  who  had   established  a   Western  constitution  and maintained  the   Catholic  King,   in   spite   of   the   Russian  party. The  French  party  then  took  the  ministry  (1844)  and  kept   it. This  caused  trouble  with  the   English  government.  On   account of   Don  Pacifico,  a   Portuguese  Jew   and  an   English  subject, whose  house  was  pillaged  in   a   riot   in   1850,   England  sent  a   fleet to   blockade  the   Piraeus.

The  Crimean  war  revolutionized  Greek  politics.  The  Greeks hoped  for   a   chance  to   complete  their  territory  through  the   war; they   sent  volunteers  and   arms  to   the   Greek  insurgents  in   Thessaly   (1854).  But   England  and  France  were  unwilling  to   have the   Ottoman  Empire  curtailed.  French  troops  came  to  occupy the   Piraeus  from  1854   to  1857.   Greece  was  forced  to  accept peace  with   the   Sultan  and   to   promise  to   pay   off   the   debt.  Russia did   nothing   for   Greece,  preferring  to  protect  the   Slavic peoples.

The  conduct  of   Greece's  former  guardians  ruined  the   French, English,  and   Russian  parties   and   completed  Otto's  unpopularity; he   was  reproached  with  having  offered  no  resistance  to   Europe. The  new  division  was  between  the  court  party  and  the  democratic party.   The   court  minister  (Miaoulis,  1857-62),  who   maintained himself   by   "   managing  "   the   elections,  became  so  unpopular that   the   army   finally   turned  against   the   King.   The   soldiers revolted  during  the   absence  of   the   King   and   plundered  the   royal palace.  A   provisional  government,  composed  of   democrats,  convoked a   national  assembly,  which  voted  to   dethrone  Otto  (1862).

The  Greeks  used  this  revolution  to   gain   an   increase  of   territory. The   Ionian  Isles,   governed  since  1815   by   English   governors, had   a   Greek  population  which  had  not  ceased  to   ask   annexation to   the   kingdom,  and   had   even  attempted  revolts  (184849).   In   1862  England  decided  to  give   them  to   Greece,  should the   new   King   please   her.  The   Greeks  hastened  to   elect  Prince Alfred,  who  refused;  then  they   chose  the   English  candidate,  a son  of   Christian  of   Gliicksburg,  Crown  Prince  of   Denmark.  He became  George  I.   in   1863.   The  Ionian  Isles  were  annexed,  and the   University  of   Corfu  was   joined   with  that   of   Athens.

The  Constitution  of   1864   established  liberty   of   the   press  and abolished  the   Senate.  All   the   parliamentary  power  was  centred

in   the   Boule,   elected  by   universal  suffrage,  increased  to   192   members with   a   four-years'  term.  Political  parties  became  hardly more  than  personal  coteries  (Kommatd)  known  by   the   leader's name,  and   usually   made  up   of   men   from   his   own  part   of   the   kingdom. The   principal  leaders  were  Komoundouros  (Maina), Delyannis  (Morea),  Bulgaris  (Nautical  Isles),   Zaimis  (Northern Morea),  Deligeorgis  (Missolonghi),  and  Lombardos  (Ionian Isles).  Competition  was  sharp   and   ministries  short.  It   became the   custom,  as   formerly  in   the   United  States,  for   each  party   to change  all   the   officials  when  it   assumed  control,  which  finally gave  political  contests  the   appearance  of   quarrels  for   private interest.  However,  behind  these  rivalries  there  was  perceptible a   clashing  between  two  opposing  tendencies - a  national  tendency, hostile   to   European  civilization,  represented  especially  by Delyannis  and  the   Moreans,  and,   on  the   other  side,   a   European tendency  represented  by   Tricoupis  and  his   attempts  at   public works  and   the   establishment  of   schools.

For   fifteen  years   the   ministry   has   alternated  between  Tricoupis (1882-85,  1886-90,  1893-95)  and  Delyannis  (1885-86,  1890-92 and  since  1895).  The  primary  objects  of   Greek  policy   are  still the   completion  of   her   territory  and   the   payment  of   the   national debt,   both  of   which  keep   the   Greeks  strictly   dependent  on   European governments  and   capitalists.  At   each   crisis  of   the   Ottoman Empire,   Greece  has   attempted  to   regain   a   bit   of   Greek  territory; but   the   powers   have  always   interfered  to   prevent   it:  - after the   aid   given   to   Cretan  insurgents  in   1868,   by   the   Conference  of Paris  (1869);  - during   the   Russian  invasion  in   1878;  - in   1886, in   connection  with  Crete.  France  and   Italy   obtained  for   Greece  a promise  in   1878,   which,  after  long   negotiations,  and  mainly by   English  exertions,  ended  in   the   annexation  of   Thessaly  in 1881.  The  finances  have  not  yet, been  restored  to   order.  The deficit  goes  on,   increased  by   armaments  for   attempts  at  war against  Turkey,  and   by   railroads  and   canals.  The   debt,   increased by   borrowing  to   pay   interest  and   by   new   loans  (1864),   grew   to exceed  $100,000,000;  payments  were  finally   suspended  in   1893. man

Nevertheless  the   country  is   gaining  in   population  (2,200,000) and   in   welfare.  Her   wealth  increases  with  her   agriculture  and commerce.  Primary  education  has  become  universal.  At   the same  time  the   assimilating  power  of   the   Hellenes  continues  to increase  the   number  of   Hellenes  in   the   Ottoman  Empire.  The whole  number  of   Greek-speaking  people   is   estimated  at   8,000,000. The  Kingdom  of   Greece  is   the   national  centre  for   the   scattered

Hellenes,  the   Greek  merchants  of   the   large   cities  of   Europe,   and the   Greek  physicians  of   the   Mussulman  countries.  It   is   to   these "   Homogenes  "   (people  of   the   same  race),   enriched  abroad  but still   Greek  patriots,  that   the   kingdom,  and   particularly  Athens, owe  the   legacies   and   foundations  that   enable  Greece  to   hold   her place   in   civilized  Europe.

## SERVIA  AND  MONTENEGRO.

Formation  of   the   Principality  of   Servia. - The   Servian  nation, which  had  suffered  an  effective  conquest,  had  lost  its   national aristocracy.  'There  remained  only   a  peasant  people  of   Servian tongue  and   Orthodox  religion  unable  to   read  or  write,   living   on corn  and   maize  and   herds  of   swine  which  fed   in   the   oak   forests. Mussulman  warriors,  settled  in   the   country,  occupied  the   place   of an  aristocracy.  But   the   Servians  were  in   relations  with  Austria; many  of   them  served  in   the   Austrian  army,   from  which  some  returned to   their  homes  having  attained  the   ranks  of   inferior  officers. These   returned  officers  and   the   pork-dealers  were  the notables  of   this   land   of   peasants. cers.

The  Christian  Servians  took  advantage  of   a  civil  war  between the   Mussulman  warriors,  to   revolt  first   in   the   name  of   the   Sultan, then  against  the   Mussulmans  ; they   took  Belgrade  and   plundered it   in   1805.   The   swineherds  of   Schoumadia,  accustomed  to   roam armed  through  the   forests,  and   the   brigands  (heiduques),  who were  popular  heroes  as   in   Greece,  were  the   fighting  force  of   the insurrection.  Georges,  the  leader,  called  by   the  Turks  Kara (the   Black),  was  a   petty   Austrian  officer  who   had   become  a   porkdealer.  The  Tsar,  who  was  at   war  with  the   Sultan  (1806-12), upheld  the   Servian  insurgents,  who  recognised  him  as   their  protector. But,   after   peace  was  made,   the   insurgents,  abandoned by   Russia,  could  resist  no   longer,   and   fled   to   Austria.  Only   a memory  and  some  epic   poems  remained  of   Kara-Georges' Servia.  The  Turks  re-established  collectors,  and  began  once more  to   impose  forced  labour,  and  to   behead  and  impale Christians.*

A   local  chief  (voiwode)  Milosh  Obrenowitch,  a  pork-dealer and  an  enemy  to   Kara-Georges,  took  up   the   work  of   emancipation, but   by   different  methods.  He   did   not  pose  as  a   national

*   The  history  of   the   Servian  people   before  the   independence  and  until 1820  is   known  almost  entirely  through  oral  tradition  and  the  national songs.

## 658           THE   CHRISTIAN  NATIONS  OF   THE  BALKANS.

hero,   but   as   a   servant  of   the   Sultan.  By   protesting  against   the servile  condition  of   Servia,   he   obtained  power   to   collect  the   taxes and  a   right   to   keep   arms.  When  Kara-Georges  came  back  to Servia,  he   was  assassinated,  by   order,   it   is   said,   of   Milosh  (1818).

Milosh,  grown  wealthy  by   levying  taxes  and  holding  the monopoly  in   the   pork   trade,   induced  the   Ottoman  government to   give   him   the   title   of   "   Prince  of   the   Servians  of   the   Pashalik of   Belgrade  "   (1820).  During  the   Sultan's  wars  against  the Greeks  and   against   the   Russians,  Milosh  remained  neutral.  The Sultan  rewarded  him  by   making  him  hereditary  prince   in   1830, withdrawing  the   Turkish  garrisons  from  the   country  (except  in Belgrade);  he   also  gave   him  some  of   the   districts  inhabited  by Servians  outside  of   the   Pashalik.  This  was  the   obscure  beginning of   the   principality  of   Servia,   under  the   form   of   a   self-governing province   of   the   Ottoman  Empire,   administered  in   the   name of   the   Sultan  by   an   hereditary  native  prince.

Milosh,  established  at   Kragujevatch,  in   the   interior,  governed as   an  absolute  monarch,*  summoning  only   on  great  occasions the   Skouptchina,  a  general  assembly  of   the   heads  of   families, which  offered  him  no  resistance.  But   he   had   displeased  Russia, then  all-powerful  with  the   Ottoman  government,  and  alienated many  of   his   own  supporters.  A   party   led   by   his   own  brother Jephrem  obliged  him  to  accept  a  constitution  in   1835;   t&gt;ut   tne Russian  and  Turkish  governments  rejected  it,   and  the   opposition fled   the   country.   Finally,   in   1837,   the   Sultan  and   Russia imposed  on   him  a  constitution  giving   him  three  ministers  and establishing  a   Senate  of   17   life-members.  The   Senate,   composed of   his   adversaries,  asked  him   for   accounts.  Milosh  attempted  to get   rid   of   the   Senate  by   a   peasant  revolt;   then,   in   1839,   abdicated in   favour  of   his   son   Milan,   a   consumptive,  who   died   soon  after, leaving  as   his   successor  Michael,  aged   sixteen  years.

Michael  reigned  with  a   regency  composed  of   the   notables  that had  overcome  Milosh.  But  the  regents  could  not  agree.  A strong  party,  supported  by   the  Turks,  revolted,  drove  out Michael,  and  made  the  Skouptchina  elect  Alexander  Karageorgewitch,  the  son  of   the  national  hero,  Kara-Georges; the  Sultan  accepted  him  (1842).  Alexander  was  a  peaceloving  prince.  Established  at   Belgrade,  where  there  was  a

*   Tradition  tells  us   that  he   took  what  he   chose,  paying  for   it   what  he chose;  whoever  was  imprudent  enough  to  complain  of   him  was  assassinated and   his   murder  credited  to   a   Turkish  brigand;  he   forced  merchants of   the   Danube  cities  to   come  and   mow  and  reap   in   his   fields.

Mussulman  garrison,  he  remained  subject  to   Austria  and the  Sultan.  He  was  reproached  with  receiving  in   Oriental fashion,  with  his   fez   on,  and  with  allowing  himself  to   be led   astray   by   the   Austrian  consul.  The  Servians  were  Ortho^dox,   and   did   not   take   kindly   to   a   prince   who   favoured  Catholics and  Mussulmans,  and  who  did  not  convoke  the  Skouptchina. The  senators  conspired  against  him  in   1857.  He  had  them arrested  and  dismissed  from  office;  the  Turkish  government forced  him  to   restore  them.  His   ministers,  working  in   harmony with  Russia,  had  a   Skouptchina  elected  which  requested  the Prince  to   abdicate  On   his   refusal,  he   was   deposed  and   old   Milosh   recalled  (1858).

Michael,  who  succeeded  Milosh  in   1860,   seems  to   have  had   a plan   to   make  one  state  of   all   the   regions   peopled   by   Orthodox Servians,  by   annexing  Bosnia,  Herzegovina,  and  Montenegro to   Servia.  This  nationalist  policy   demanded  a  military  force  in Servia  and   an  understanding  with  Servians  abroad.  Michael  began to   build   up   a   Servian  army.   It   was  composed  of   a   very small  standing  force  of   2   battalions,  designed  only   to   serve  as  a nucleus;  and,   secondly,  of   a   national  militia  to   include  all   ablebodied  men  (80,000).  Abroad  the  Servians  excited  and  supported the   insurgent   Christians  in   Herzegovina  (1862).  This nationalist  agitation  led   to  conflicts  in   Belgrade  between  the Christian  inhabitants  and   the   Turkish  garrison.  The   Turks  fired on  the   city.   The   European  powers  intervened  and  obliged  the Sultan  to   withdraw  his   troops   from  Belgrade.  Turkish  garrisons still   remained  in   certain  fortresses.  By   direct  agreement with  the   Turkish  government,  Michael  secured  their  withdrawal in   1867.   He   still   kept   the   Turkish  flag   by   the   side   of   the   Servian flag,   as   the   last   remnant  of   Ottoman  rule   in   Servia.  He   was about  to   secure  something  still   better,  the   government  of   Bosnia, under  promise  of   paying   a   tribute.  This  would  have  been  a   long step   toward  a   Greater  Servia.  But   the   hatred  felt   toward  him   by the   family   of   Kara-Georges,  the   Karageorgewics,  was  a   fatal obstacle.  These  opponents,  supported  by   Austria,  formed  a conspiracy  and   assassinated  Michael  in   1868.

Servia  under  the   Constitutional  System. - Michael  had   no  children; but   his   family,   the   Obrenowics,  had   become  the   popular national  dynasty;  the   Skouptchina  proclaimed  Prince  Milan,  Milosh's  grand-nephew,  who  was  then  14   years  old   and  was  at school  in   Paris.  The  council  of   regency  which  governed  in   his name  until   his   majority  (1872)   was  presided  over   by   Ristitch,  the

leader  of   the   Liberal  party.   Ristitch  tried   to   organize  the   government on   the   European  plan,   by   the   Constitution  of   1869.

The  Senate  was  transformed  into   a   Council  of   State   of   u   to   15 members  appointed  by   the  government;  its   functions  were  to prepare  legislation,  to   settle  cases  in   administrative  law,   and   in addition  to   supervise  the   public   expenditures.  The   Skouptchina became  a   representative  assembly,  regularly  elected,  one  member for   every  10,000   in   population.  In   this   community  of   substantially equal   peasant  proprietors,  there  could  be   no   thought  of   establishing either   a   middle-class  representative  system  or  an  aristocratic second  chamber.  Suffrage  was  made  almost  universal,  as  every taxpayer  could  vote,  and  the  deputies  received  salaries.  The Skouptchina  remained  the   only   assembly,  but   to   supply   the   place of   an  aristocracy,  the   prince   was  given   the   right   to   add   members by   appointment  to  the  extent  of   one-fourth  of   the  whole. Changes  in   the   constitution,  territory,  or  government  were  to   be voted  by   a   special   Skouptchina,  four  times  as  numerous  as   the ordinary  assembly.  This  was  the   beginning  of   political  life   in Servia.  Parties  were  formed  with  European  names:  conservative, progressist,  liberal,   radical.  Certain  of   these   names  covered nothing  but   personal  rivalries  between  party   leaders.  However, it   is   plain   that   political   life   in   Servia  was   in   reality   dominated  by the   opposition,  if   not   between  two  parties,   at   least  between  two tendencies.

·   The   Servian  masses,  essentially  peasant  and   Orthodox,  were determined  not  to   be   burdened  with  officials  and  taxes.  The most  prominent  aims  of   their  domestic  policy   were  to   procure communal  autonomy,  insist  upon  economy,  and  refuse  to  pay new  taxes.  In   foreign   policy   their   religious  sympathies  demanded alliance  with  Orthodox  Russia,  and  the   union  of   all   Orthodox Servians  to   Servia.  The  Radical  party,  which  has  taken  the direction  of   this   movement,  is   above  all   a  popular  party  with little   love   for   Western  civilization.  Its   instrument  is   the   Skouptchina, whose   elections,   apart   from   government  pressure,  always give   a   Radical  majority.  Its   centre  was  at   first   at   Kragujevatch, the   former  capital,   whose  place   has   been  taken  by   Belgrade.

The  policy   of   the   government,  on   the   contrary,  looked  toward the   introduction  into  Servia  of   the   institutions  of   monarchical Europe.  It   desired  to   connect  the   country  with  the   economic life   of   the   civilized  world  by   building  railroads  and   developing her   trade   with   Austria,  the   natural  outlet  for   Servians  agricultural products.  To   do   this   the   government  had  to  raise  money  by

taxes  and   loans  and   make  overtures  to   the   Western  governments, especially  Austria.  Its   domestic  policy   therefore  consisted  in maintaining  the   supremacy  of   the   central  government  in   spite   of the   Skouptchina,  extending  the   power  of   the   officials  at   the   expense of   the   communes,  and  increasing  the   standing  army  and the   taxes.  Its   foreign   policy   was  to   secure  an  alliance  with   Austria. The   partisans   of   this   policy   were   few   in   number  but   they had   the   great   advantage  of   having   on   their   side   all   the   permanent powers  of   the   country, - the   prince,   the   ministers,  the   Council  of State,   the   office-holders  and  the   army  officers.  The  personal parties   into   which  they   were  divided  differed  mainly,   it   seems,   in the   degree   of   arbitrary  procedure  that   each  was  ready   to   employ in   order  to   restrain  the   Radical  movement.

The  Liberal  party,  under  Ristitch,  governed  during  the  regency, 1868   to   1872.   Prince  Milan,   on  attaining  his   majority, took  a   Conservative  ministry,  then  a   Progressist  ministry.  But the   Christian  revolt  in   Herzegovina  excited  national  passion  in the   Skouptchina  to   the   point   of   obliging   Milan  to   take   a   Radical nationalist  ministry  (Grouitch  and  Ristitch),  which  decided  to make  war  on   Turkey  with  Russia's  assistance.

Servia  began   the   war   (July,   1876).   When  conquered  and   invaded by   the   enemy,  she   was  saved  by   European  intervention, which  imposed  on  the   Sultan  a   truce,  then  a   peace.  But   during the   Russian  invasion  of   1877   Servia  reopened  the   war.  At   the final   peace  of   Berlin  (1878)   sh.e   obtained  a   territorial  increase  and complete  independence.  But  the   war  had   left   a   heavy   debt,   and the   peace,   by   establishing  Austria  in   the   Servian  country  of   Herzegovina, gave   rise   to   great   discontent,  because  it   made   the   building up   of   a   Greater  Servia  impossible.  The  Radical  nationalist party,  wishing  to   continue  a   Russian  policy,   negotiated  with  the Bulgarians  to  attempt  a  recovery  of   Bosnia  with  Russia's  aid. In   the   meantime  it   protested  against   the   plan   of   a   railroad  joining the   Austrian  system  and  rejected  the   commercial  treaty  with Austria.

Austria  sent  a   threatening  note  which  caused  the   dismissal  of the   ministry.  The  Austrian  party  took  the   power   in   October, 1880,   and,   under  different  ministries,  for   the   most  part   Progressist, held   it   until  1887.   The   prince   procured  from  Austria  and   his allies  permission  to   take  the   title   of   King   of   Servia  (1882).   The Radicals  protested  against  the   treaty  concluded  with   the   General Union  (Bontoux)  and  demanded  a  revision  of   the   constitution  in 1883.  The  government  got   rid   of   the   opposition  at   first   by   an-

## 662  THE   CHRISTIAN  NATIONS  OF   THE  BALKANS.

nulling  the   elections  of   Radicals  (1882)   and   later   by   a   coup   d'etat. The  Radicals  had  regained  the   majority;  the   King   adjourned  the Skouptchina,  suspended  the   guarantees  of   liberties,  put   the   country under  martial  law,   and   ordered  the   surrender  of   all   arms. The  Radicals  rebelled,  and  the   insurrection  ended  in   the   shooting of   many,  a   vast  prosecution  (819   accused),  and   the   establishment of   absolutism  (1883).  The  Skouptchina,  elected  under  official pressure,  was  merely   an   instrument  for   voting   government proposals.  In   place   of   the   poll-tax   a   new  system  was  established of   taxes  on   land,   houses,  capital,   income  (1884),   and   a   government monopoly  in   tobacco.  The   communes  lost   their   autonomy, with  their  right   to   levy   taxes  and   dispense  justice.  Servia  came under  a  centralized  administration  after  the  European  model. She  began   to   have  a   standing  army   like   the   European  countries (25,000   infantry),  with   a   three-year  service;  also   a   European  debt formed  during  the   war  of   1876-78,  and  increasing  with  subsequent deficits   (it   was   $5,000,000  in   1878   and   $65,000,000  in   1895).

The  Radical  party  made  the   Constitution  of   1888,   which  transformed the   Skouptchina  into   a   purely   representative  assembly, suppressing  the   one-fourth  appointed  by   the   King,   and  greatly increasing  its   powers.  Milan  abdicated  in   1889,   declaring  that he   would  not   be   "   a   King   for   signing   papers."  His   son   Alexander being   still   a   minor,   he   appointed  a   regency  under  Ristitch, who  promised  to  maintain  the  same  foreign  policy.  Servia seemed  to   have  entered  upon  the   parliamentary  system  under the   direction  of   a   Radical-Liberal  coalition.

The  war  of   1885   against   Bulgaria,  which  ended  in   defeat  and invasion,  made  the   government  and   the   King   so  unpopular  that after  several  ministerial  crises  and   reconstitutions  of   the   Garaschanine  ministry,  the  Austrian  Progressist  party   found  itself unable  to  govern.  Milan  gave  the   ministry  to  the   nationalist opposition,  the  Russian  party,  a  coalition  of   Radicals  and Liberals;  first   a   Liberal  ministry  under  Ristitch  (1887),   quickly succeeded  by   a   Radical  ministry  under  Grouitch.*

*The  domestic  quarrels  of   the  royal   family,  which  were  given   such notoriety  by   the   European  papers,  were  nothing  more  than  episodes.  In 1888  Milan,  having  quarrelled  with  Queen  Nathalie,  the  daughter  of   a Russian  colonel,  prevailed  on  the  Metropolitan  to   pronounce  a   divorce, and  got   back  the  Crown  Prince,  who  had  been  taken  to   Germany  by   his mother.  Nathalie  returned  to   Belgrade  in   1889.  The  government  begged her  to   go   away  and  finally   insisted  upon   it.   The  people  rallied  to   her defence,  and  she  was  taken  away   in   the   night   (1891).  Later  the   king   and queen  were  reconciled  and  annulled  their  divorce  (1893).

But   Milan  took  advantage  of   the   discords  between  the   Radicals and   Liberals  of   the   regency  to   resume  control  of   the   young King   secretly.  Alexander  I.,   by   his   father's  advice,  made  two coups   d'etat  in   succession:  I.   He   declared  himself  of   age,   had the   regents  arrested,  and  gave  the  ministry  to   his  teacher Dokitsch,  who  rested  on  the   Liberal  party   (1893).  He   brought his   father  to   Servia,  and,   in   order  to   silence  the   newspapers, which  were  attacking  him,   restored  to   him  by   decree  the   rank  of member  of   the   royal   family.  2.   Breaking  with  the   Radicals,  he issued  a   decree  abrogating  the   Constitution  of   1888  and   the   laws guaranteeing  liberty  of   the   press  and   communal  elections.  He also   restored  the   Constitution  of   1869.   He   then  put   himself  in the   hands  of   the   Austrian  party,   which,  under  ministries  of   diferent  names,  Liberal  (Christitch)  or   Progressist  (Garaschanine), has   kept   the   power  and   governed  with  the   support  of   the   officials and   military  officers,  levying   the   taxes  by   royal   decree,  arresting or   dismissing  Radical  and  Liberal  leaders,  and  procuring  the election  of   a   ministerial  Skouptchina.  The   negotiations  between the   King   and   the   Radical  party   for   the   establishment  of   a   constitution having   come  to   nothing   (1896),   Servia  remains  under  a provisional  system.

Montenegro. - Tchernagora,  better  known  by   the   Italian  name Montenegro,  is   a   small,   almost  inaccessible  country  lying   in   the range  of   mountains  that  skirts  the  eastern  Adriatic.  It   had maintained  itself  as  a   practically  independent  district  within  the Ottoman  Empire.  Its   inhabitants,  Orthodox  Serbs,  nominally Turkish  subjects,  formed  a   small  nation  of   armed  mountaineers, governed  by   a   family   of   national  and   religious  leaders  who   succeed each   other   from   uncle   to   nephew,   with   the   title   of   Vladika  or prince-bishop.  It   was  a   democracy  of   warriors ; the   women  cultivated the   land   and   the   men  practised   arms.  The   neighbourhood of   Herzegovina  gave   Montenegro  a  political  role;   the Vladikas  became  allies  of   Russia,  which  used  the   Montenegrins to   rouse  the   Christian  Serbs  of   Herzegovina  and   to   make  raids upon  the  Turks. hood

In   1851   Danilo,  on  succeeding  his   uncle,   dropped  the   title of   Vladika,  married,  and   founded  the   dynasty  of   the   princes   of Montenegro.  The  Sultan  sent  an  army  against  him,   which  the Tsar  obliged   him  to   recall  (1852).   Then,   in   return  for   the   attitude he   had   taken  in   the   Crimean  war,   the   Prince  of   Montenegro received  an  annual  subsidy  from  the   Tsar.  Danilo  was   killed  by a   private   enemy   in   1860   and   was  succeeded  by   his   nephew   Nikita.

Montenegrin  political  life  consisted  of   little  more  than  the almost  continual  struggle  against  the   Mussulmans,  which  came to   open  war  during  the   Herzegovina  insurrections  (1862   and 1876).  Russia  repaid   Montenegro's  services  in   the   campaign  of 1877   by   making  the   Sultan  cede  to   her   a   larger   and   more  populous territory   than   the   whole  former  principality,  with   a   port which  assured  her   communication  with  Europe  (1878).  But  the Albanian  Mussulmans  who  occupied  the   country  refused  to   give it   up ;   and   Montenegro  got   possession  of   it   only   after  a   long   war and  the   famous  demonstration  of   the   European  fleets  before Dulcigno.

Of   domestic  political  life   there  has   been  extremely  little.  The prince,   once  officially  independent  of   the   Sultan,  has   remained  an absolute  sovereign,  controlling  the  budget,  exercising  all   the powers,  appointing  even  Church  officials.  But  he   has   covered the   patriarchal  system  with  European  forms.  The  administrative Statute   of   1879   established  a   legislative  Council  of   State   of   8 members,  half  chosen  by   the   prince,   the   other  half   elected  by   the people.  A   legal   code  of   the   French  sort   has   been  adopted.  The organization  has  remained  military,  the  people  divided  into tribes,   each  with  its   elective  elders  and   its   military  chief.  But the   princely  family   of   Montenegro,  by   means  of   marriages  with the   reigning  families  of   Russia  (1889)   and  Italy   (1896),  has entered  the   society   of   European  dynasties.

## BULGARIA.

The   Bulgarian  People   before  the   Union  of   1885. - Bulgaria,  like Servia,   had   a   Christian  population  of   Orthodox  Slavs,   subject   to a   Mussulman  aristocracy.  The  Bulgarian  people  was  made  up only   of   peasants,  tenants  of   Mussulman  landlords.  But   while  the other  Christian  nations  retained  at   least  their  national  clergy,   the Bulgarian  clergy,  subject  to   the   Greek  Church  of   Constantinople, had   been  disorganized.  The  Greek  bishops  had  endeavoured  to Hellenize  the   Orthodox  Bulgarians,  by   replacing  their  Bulgarian religious  books  with  Greek  books,  the   Slavonic  liturgy   with  the Greek  liturgy,  and   by   establishing  Greek  schools.  In   the   Ottoman Empire   where  every  nationality  was  represented  by   its national  church,  the   Bulgarians,  subjected  as   they   were  to   Greek bishops,  had   ceased  to   form  a   nationality.  They   were  counted  in with  the   Greeks  under  the   general  head  of   Orthodox  Greeks. The  world  had   forgotten  the   Bulgarian  people.  The  Russians,

when  they   occupied  the   country  in   1828,   were  surprised  to   find   a Slavic  people,  speaking  a   language  much  like   their  own.

With  the   Russian  occupation  the   Bulgarian  nation  awoke  to new  life.  A   number  of   patriots  took  heart  and  entered  into  a struggle  with  the   Greeks.  The  upper   Greek  clergy,  supported by   the   Turkish  government,  persecuted  the   patriots,  whom  they suspected  of   acting   as  agents  of   Russian  propagandism.  In order  to   escape  the   Greek  clergy,   the   Bulgarians,  following  the advice  of   Austrian  Catholics,  began   about  1859   to   form  United Greek  churches,  which  entered  the   Catholic  communion  by   submission to   the   Pope,   on  condition  of   preserving  at   the   same  time their   Slavic  rite   and   their   married  priests.  The   Bulgarians  as  a consequence  became  the  proteges  of   the  Catholic  powers France  and   Austria.  Russia  was  so   disturbed  at   the   loss   of   them that   she   persuaded  the   Sultan  to   institute  an   independent  Bulgarian Church   with   a   supreme  head,   the   Bulgarian  Exarch,  established at   Constantinople  in   1870.  The  Greek  Patriarch  excommunicated the   Bulgarian  clergy.

The  Bulgarians  were  still   only   a   nation  of   raias  under  Mussulman administration.  An   insurrection,  organized  by   a   committee established  in   Roumania,  led   to   the   famous  massacres  of   1876 (see   p.   632)   and   the   Russian  occupation.  The  Bulgarian  state was  founded  by   Russia  after  the   war.  The  principality  of   Bulgaria, as   Russia  arranged  in   the   treaty  with  the   Sultan,  was  to comprise  the   whole  Bulgarian  race,   including  Macedonia,  which was  inhabited  by   a  mixture  of   nationalities - Bulgarians,  Servians, Greeks,   Wallachians,  and  Albanians.  The  new  state seemed  destined  to   remain  under  Russia's  hand.

The  principality  of   Bulgaria  was  organized  by   the   Russians who  occupied  the   country  and   who,   on  withdrawing,  left   military officers  there.  The  Constitution  of   1879   was  presented  by   the Russian  governor  to  an  elective  national  assembly  and  was adopted  by   it.   As   in   Servia,   it   established  a   ministry   and   a   single assembly,  the   Sobranje,  elected  by   universal  suffrage,  with  a

The  Congress  of   Berlin,  fearing   Russian  influence,  cut  the   Bulgarian state   into   three   parts.   It   restored  the   Sultan  to   full   possession of   Macedonia.  Of  the  Bulgarian  region  south  of   the Balkans,  it   made  eastern  Roumelia  a  self-governing  province under  a  mixed  administration.  It   left  to   Bulgaria  only   the northern  region,   which  became  tributary  to   the   Sultan,  like   Roumania before   1878,   with   a   prince   elected  by   the   country  and   approved by   the   Sultan. session

quarter  of   the  members  to   be   chosen  by   the   prince,  and  a double  number  for  changing  the  constitution;  it   proclaimed all   the   modern  liberties.  In   Bulgaria,  as   in   Servia,  society was  democratic,  composed  of  peasants,  popes,  and  schoolteachers. The   prince   elected  by   the   assembly  was   Alexander of   Battenberg,  whom  the   Tsar  had  suggested.  A   Bulgarian militia  was  organized  and  commanded  by   Russian  officers, with  an  outfit  left   by   the   Russian  army.  In   fact,   Bulgaria was  at   first   governed  by   the   Russians,  as   the   grateful  assembly recognised  those  who  remained  in   the   country  as   having   all   the rights   of   Bulgarian  citizens,  and   consequently  admitted  them  to every  office.

The  Bulgarian  assembly  soon  broke  up   into  political  parties, which  astonished  the   outside  world  by   their  practical  sense.  The chief   leaders  were  teachers  who  had   been  educated  abroad.  The division  came  on  the  nationalist  question.  The  conservative party   (Grekoff)  resigned  themselves  to   the   separation  of   Roumelia  in   order  to   avoid  trouble  with  Europe.  The  nationalist party,  which  demanded  unity   at   the   risk   of   war,  was  composed  of two  groups,  Liberals  (Zankoff)  and  Radicals  (Karaveloff). These  divisions  corresponded  to  personal  rivalries.  Prince Alexander  formed  a   Conservative  ministry,  favourable  to  an alliance  with  Austria.  The  Radical-Liberal  party,  which  was popular  with  the   masses,  had  a   majority  in   the   Sobranje  (1879). Political  life   began   with  a   conflict  between  the   prince   and   the assembly.  The  Sobranje  was  dissolved  in   1879   and   re-elected  in 1880.  Alexander  tried  a  nationalist  ministry,  and  then  made  a coup   d'etat.  He   dismissed  the   ministry,  convoked  an  assembly, suppressed  the  constitution,  and  secured  for  himself  special powers  (1881).  He   formed  a   Conservative  ministry  under  two Russian  generals,  who  ended  by   dismissing  the   Conservatives and  governing  alone.*

The  leaders  of   all   the   Bulgarian  parties,   discontented  with   this foreign  government,  arranged  secretly  among  themselves,  then with  the   Prince,   to   rid   themselves  of   the   Russians.  The   Sobranje suddenly  presented  an  address  to   the   Prince,  begging  him  to   re-

*   Skoboleff,  one  of   these  Russians,  tells  us   that   Alexander  attributed  the coup   cTttat  to   the   Russians  in   order  to   damage  their  popularity,  but   had in   fact   made  it   himself  at   the   instigation  of   Austria.  He   further  says   that the  Conservative  party,  to  which  his  colleagues  belonged,  was  only   a clique   of   some  two  hundred  persons  hostile  to   Russia;  that  the   leaders  of this   faction,  knowing  their  own  unpopularity,  attempted  to   veil  their  antiRussian  designs  under  cover  of   a   partly   Russian  Cabinet.

store  the   Constitution  of   1879,   and   suggesting  the   desired  amendments. The   Russians  were  taken  by   surprise;  they   left   the assembly  in   a   fury   and   handed  in   their  resignation.*  The   prince formed  a  coalition  ministry  of   Conservatives  and  Liberals 1  1883),   then   an  exclusively  Liberal  ministry.  The  revised  constitution created   a   second   Chamber.  But   Russian  officers  continued to   command  the   Bulgarian  army;  the   Russian  diplomatic agent  excited  against  the  Liberals  the  Radical  party,  which gained  a   majority  in   the   Sobranje  of   1884   and   was  put   in   possession of   the   ministry.

Meanwhile  eastern  Roumelia  had  been  organized  as  a  selfgoverning  province  with  a  national  militia  commanded  by European  officers,  an  elective  provincial  assembly,  a   Christian governor  appointed  by   the   Sultan  for   5   years,  and   a   directory  to perform  the   functions  of   a  ministry.  The  first  governor  was Vogorides,  a   Greek,  who  surrounded  himself  with  Bulgarians; the   second,  appointed  under  Russian  pressure,  was  one  of   the members  of   the   directory,  a   Bulgarian  (Krestowitch),  who  took the  name  of   Gavril-Pasha.  The  provincial  assembly  desired union  with  Bulgaria;  the   officials  and   military  officers  endeavoured to   make  way   for   it.   It   was  a   general   conspiracy.  One day   (September  18,   1885)   a   battalion  of   militia  arrested  the   governor and   the   general-in-chief;  a   provisional  government  was  set up   and   was  at   once  recognised  by   all   the   local  authorities.  It asked  aid   from  the   Prince  of   Bulgaria.  The   Tsar,   who   had   been displeased  with  the   Bulgarians  since  1883,   did   not  want  the union.  Prince  Alexander  knew  this,f   but   he   had   to   choose  between a   rupture  with  Russia  and   a   breach  with  his   own  subjects by   fighting   the   Roumelian  Bulgarians.  He   agreed   to   the   union, took  the   title   of   "   Prince  of   the   Two   Bulgarias,"  and   went  with his   army   to   take   possession  of   Roumelia,  where  he   was  recognised as   prince   by   a   general   vote  of   the   inhabitants.

Bulgaria  since  the   Union  of   1885. - The  union  transformed Bulgarian  politics.     At   first   the   great   powers,   fearing   a   general insurrection,   condemned   the   action   of    the    Bulgarians.     The

*   According  to   an   Austrian  account,  Kaulbars  left  the  hall  crying: "   Pigs,   blackguards,  liars!  "   while  the   Bulgarians  replied  with  cheers.

f He  had  been  informed  of   it   in   an   interview  with  the   Russian  minister, Giers,  and  had  replied  that  the   people   desired  the   union,  but   did   not   seem ready   for   it.   He   was  warned  of   the   revolution  three  days   in   advance,  it is   said,   by   a   delegation  from  the   revolutionary  committee,  and   dissuaded them  from  the   idea;   but  on   their  return  the   delegates  found  the   revolution already   in   progress.

Tsar  recalled  the   Russian  officers  who  were  in   command  of   th&lt; Bulgarian  army.  The  European  ambassadors  at   Constantinopli "   condemned  the   revolution  "   and   called  upon   the   Bulgarians  t disarm  and  dissolve  the   union.  Then  the   Servian  army   invade&lt; Bulgaria,  which  was  unprotected  on  the   western  side.  Alexan der   came  back  from  Roumelia.  The  army,  with  Bulgarian  offi cers  in   place   of   the   Russians,  took  the   offensive,  forced  thi Servians  back  through  the   passes  and  drove  them  into  Servia Europe  imposed  peace.

Bulgaria's  victory  made  the   separate  existence  of   Roumeli; impracticable.  The  great  powers  continued,  however,  to   deman&lt; execution  of   the   Treaty  of   Berlin  and  to   refuse  to   recognis&lt; the   new  state   formed  by   the   fusion  of   the   two   Bulgarias;  but   the; contented  themselves  with  a  protest.  The  Turkish  governmen finally   accepted  a  compromise:  Alexander  was  appointed  gov ernor  of   Roumelia  (1886).

Russia  would  not   be   appeased.  The  result  was  to   make  of   th Radical  party,   determined  to   maintain  the   union,  a  nationalis party  opposed  to   foreign  intervention.  This  party   kept   th ministry  and   had   an  enormous  majority  in   the   Sobranje,  now  re enforced  by   delegates  from  Roumelia.  Zankoff,  the  leader  c the   Liberal  party,   became  an  agitator  in   Russia's  service  agains the   government.  There  remained  a  strong  Russian  party   in   th army  and  among  the  Orthodox  clergy.  The  officers  of   specia military  services  and  the   pupils   of   the   military  school  at   Sofi made  a  military  coup   d'etat.  Alexander,  surprised  by   the   con spirators,  was   forced  to   abdicate  and   was  carried  out  of   the   coun try.   Zankoff  issued  a   proclamation  explaining  the   deposition  a the   result  of   following  a   policy   hostile  to   the   Slavic  race   (August 1886).  A   counter  revolution  quickly  followed.  The  conspir ators  were  arrested,  Alexander  was  recalled  and  received  wit) acclamation.  The  Tsar,   however,  refused  to   approve  his   return Alexander  abdicated,  and  a   regency  of   three  members  took  th power  until  a   new  prince   should  be   elected.

Stambouloff,  one  of   the   regents  and   president  of   the   Sobranje then  took  charge  of   Bulgaria.  He   governed  in   harmony  witl Moutkouroff,  the   Roumelian  commander  of   militia;  but   he   quar relied  with  the   third  regent,   Karaveloff,  the   former  leader  of   th Radical  party.

Bulgaria's  whole  political  life   turned  on  plans   for   inducing Europe  to   accept  the   union  and   on   the   struggle  against   the   Rus sian   party.  Russia  refused  to   recognise  the   Sobranje  because  o

the   presence  of   the   Roumelian  delegates.  She  demanded  first (1886)  the   withdrawal  of   martial  law  and  the   holding  of   new elections;  then,   in   1887,   a   Russian  general  for   regent,  and   for prince   the   Prince  of   Mingrelia,  a   Russian  subject.  The   Sobra/nje refused  in   the   name  of   national  independence.  But   it   was  not easy  to   find   a   prince.  Waldemar  of   Denmark  was  elected  in 1886,   but   refused.  The   Bulgarian  government  gave  up   trying   to appease  the  Tsar  and  decided  to   lean  on   Austria.  It   had  a Catholic  prince   elected,  Ferdinand  of   Coburg,  an  officer  in   the Hungarian  army   (July,   1887),   who  took  a   Stambouloff  ministry. The  powers  refused  to   recognise  him.

The  Russian  party   in   Bulgaria  tried,   by   means  of   intrigues, military  plots,   insurrections  (February,  1887,   November,  1887, 1888),   and   attempts  at   murder  (1887,   1891),   to   overthrow  Stambouloff and   put   the   country   under   Russia's  protection  once  more. Stambouloff  defended  himself  with  prosecutions,  executions,  suppressions of   newspapers  and  a  system  of   terror;  he   was  accused of   torturing  accused  men  and   condemning  innocent  men  (case   of Major  Paniza,  1890).  The  Liberals  protested  against  the   violation of   the   liberties  guaranteed  by   the   constitution.  But   the government  was  consolidated;  Ferdinand  was  recognised  by the   Sultan,  and   had   the   constitution  revised,  cutting  down  the number  of   deputies  and   increasing  their  term  from  3   to   5   years. The  Metropolitan  was  condemned  to   prison   for   preaching  a   sermon against   the   Catholic  prince.

At   length   Ferdinand,  wearied  of   obeying  Stambouloff,  took  a Conservative  ministry,  recalled  the   former  leaders,  the   Radical Karaveloff  and  the   Liberal  Zankoff,  and   made  advances  to   the Orthodox  Russian  party   (1894).  Stambouloff  was  assassinated in   1895,   and   his   murderers  are  still   unpunished.  Ferdinand  has had  his   son,   Crown  Prince  Boris,  baptized  into  the   Orthodox Church  (1896),   with  the   Tsar  for   his   godfather.  Bulgaria  has been  reconciled  with  Russia,  and  at   the   same  time   has   maintained her   national  independence  and   unity.

The  agitation  for   the   union  of   Macedonia  continues.  Bands of   Bulgarian  insurgents  have  fought  small  battles  in   the   cause (1896).  But  the   Bulgarian  agitation  meets  other  agitations  in Macedonia,  for   the   population  there  is   very  mixed,  and   it   is doubtful  whether  the  majority  of   Slavs  are   Bulgarians  or Servians.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.- Lavisse  and  Eambaud,  "   Hist.  Generate,"  vol.  ix., p.   737,   indicates  complete  histories.- See   Lorenz,  "   Catalogue  de   la   Librairie   Frang.,"  for   books  written  in   French;  for   Greece,  Hertzberg,  "   Gesch, Griechenlands,"  which  may  serve  as  a   bibliography;  for  Roumania, Bergner,  "   Rumanien,"  1887,  J.   Bengesco,  "Bibliogr.  Franco-Roumaine  dt XIXe  S.,"   1895. - For   recent  works  see   the"  JahresberichtederGeschichts wissenschaft  "   (since   1878).

DOCUMENTS.- The  majority  of   documents  and  references  are  found in   the   three  "   Annuaires"  and   the   "   Staatsarchiv  "   (see   Pref.  p.   viii.),   01 in   the   reviews  published  in   Germany,  France,  and  England,  mentioned  ir the  bibliog.  for  each  of   these  countries.- For  Roumania,  Petrescu  anc Stourdza,  "   Actes  et   Documents  Relatifs  a   1'Histoire  de   la   Regeneration  de la   Roumanie,"  7   vols.,   1889-92.

WORKS.- COMPLETE  HISTORIES  :   Bamberg,  "   Gesch.  der   Oriental.  Frage   ' (Oncken  coll.),  period  1856-78.- Oncken,  "   Zeitalter  d.   K.   Wilhelm' (Oncken  coll.).

DESCRIPTION  OF   POLITICAL  CUSTOMS:  E.   de   Laveleye,  "La  Peninsule  des Balkans,"  1886,  the  story  of   a   flying  trip. - Sp.   Gopcevic,  "   Der  Turko Montenegrinische  Krieg,  1876-78,"  3   vols.,  1879;   "   Serbien  und  die   Ser ben,"  1881;  "   Oberalbanian  und  seine  Liga,"  1881;  "   Bulgarien  unc Ostrumelien,  1876-86,"  1886,  "   Makedonien  und  Alt-Serbien,"  1889 journalistic  works;  insufficient,  but   full   of   interesting  details.

ROUMANIA:  Prince  Bibesco,  "Roumanie,  1829-49,"  2  vols.,  1893-94.Samuelson,  "Roumania,"  1882  (in   English). - E.   Bergner,  "Rumanien,' 1887. - Blarambevg,  "   Essai  sur   les   Institutions  de   la   Roumanie,"  1885.

GREECE:  Mendelsohn-Bartlioldy,  "   Geschichte  Griechenlands,"  2  vols., 1870-74  ("Staatengesch.  d.   n.   Zeit."  coll.). - Hertzberg,  "   Gesch.  Griechen lands,"  vols.  iii.   and   iv. ,   1879   (Gotha   coll.),   stops   at   1878,   both   scientific  anc critical.

In   addition  to   the   works  previous  to   1878   mentioned  in   Hertzberg,  see Thouvenel,  "   La   Grece  du   roi   Othon,"  1890,   private   letters  of   a   diplomat. SERBIA  :   Eanke,  "   Serbien  und  die   Serben,"  1879,   chief  history  of   the independence.

BULGARIA  :   Jirecek,  "   Das  Furstenthum  Bulgarien,"  1891,   chief  complete history.- Kanitz,  "   Donau-Bulgarien,"  3   vols.,  1877-80,  for  the  Turkish period. - For  Alexander's  reign:  A.Koch,  "   Prinz  Alexander  von  Battenberg,"  1887;  the  author  was  the  prince's  chaplain. - A.   v.   Huhn,  "Dei Kampf  der  Bulgaren  um  ihre  Nationaleinheit,"  1886;  "   Aus  Bulgarischer  Sturmzeit,"  1886,   from  the   German  point   of   view.- Sobolew,  "Der Erste  Fiirst  v.   Bulgarien,"  1886,  trans,  from  the   Russian.- Draudar  .   .   . "   Prince  Alexander  of   Battenberg,"  1884.

## CHAPTER   XXII.

## TRANSFORMATION     IN     THE    MATERIAL    CONDITIONS     OF POLITICAL    LIFE.

Industrial  Inventions. - No   other  period   in   the   history   of   the human  race  has   seen  such  profound  and   rapid   transformations  in the   material  conditions  of   life   as   have   taken  place   in   Europe   during the   nineteenth  century.  The   practical  arts,   which  had   been merely  improved  since  old   times  by   slow  changes  in   points   of   detail, have   been   so   completely  revolutionized  that   the   distance  is much  greater  between  the   industrial  processes  of   the   eighteenth century  and   those  of   the   present  day   than  between  those  of   the eighteenth  century  and   the   ancient  arts,   even  those  of   Egypt.*

This  revolution  is   the   result  of   technical  inventions  made  partly by   experiment,  party   by   methodical  application  of   the   theoretical sciences.  Many  of   these  inventions  date  back  to   the   last   third of   the   eighteenth  century;  but   their  practical  effect  was  not   felt by   the   masses  in   Europe   before  the   end   of   the   wars  of   Napoleon. The  transformation  of   industrial  life   did   not  really   begin   until after  1814.  It   is   the   greatest  modern  event,  an   international event,  for   the   inventions  have  been  made  by   scholars  and  inventors of   all   nations,  united  in   so  close  an   international  collaboration that   it   is   not  always  possible  to   determine  which country  took  the   initiative  in   each;   and   they   have  passed   from one  nation  to   another,  gaining  imperceptibly  from  each.

We  are  already  so  accustomed  to   the   new  conditions  of   material life   that   we  can   hardly   realize  the   Europe   of   1814,   so  near to   us   in   space  of   time   and   so   far   from   us   in   conditions  of   life. It   is   therefore  well   worth  our  while  to   recall  the   principal  inventions which   in   three-quarters  of   a   century   have   placed   such a   distance  between  our  ancestors  and   us.   I   shall   not   try   to   give their  history;  almost  all   of   them  have  been  accomplished  at   dif-

*   To   get   an   impression  of   this   vast   difference  in   the   rapidity  of   evolution we   need   only   compare  the   paintings  on   the   Egyptian  tombs  representing the   trades,   the   Encyclopedia  engravings  of   the   i8th   century  and the   figures   in   any   contemporary  work  of   popular   science.

ferent  times  by   a   series  of   fumbles  and   successive  improvements,* which  make  it   difficult  even  to   classify  them  in   chronological order.  It   is   enough   here   to   enumerate  them  and   group  them  according to   the   knowledge  of   which  they   are  the   application.

The  mechanical  inventions,  almost  all   made  in   England  in   the eighteenth  century,  were  at   first  hand-machines,  machines  for spinning  cotton,  for   spinning  wool,   for   carding  wool,   for   weaving cotton,   for   weaving   wool,   for   making   stockings.  Between 1790  and  1815   the   English  used  water-power  for   driving  their spinning  and  weaving  machines.  Steam  was  not  used  until later.  Agricultural  machinery  and  machinery  for  the  manufacture of   paper  were  slow  in   coming  into  use.  Invention  has revolutionized  modes  of   communication  by   macadamized  roads (1820)  and  graded  tracks - which  have  replaced  the   costly   and nncomfortable  stone  roads,  with  their  direct  lines  and  steep grades;  also  by   suspension  bridges,  viaducts,  and  railroad tunnels.

Machinery,  by   transforming  the   extractive  industries,  has   procured in   enormous  quantities  the   materials  neces'sary  to  other industries - coal,   metals,  and  petroleum.  The  manufacture  of metals,  transformed  by   the   use  of   coal,   the   building  of   great furnaces  and   steam  hammers,  has   furnished  iron,   brass,   and   steel, which  are  the   primary  materials  in   the   manufacture  of   the   instruments of   modern  industry:  tools,  arms,  rails,   machines,  frameworks, and   bridges.

The  gold   and   silver  mines  have   been  doubled  in   production  by the   use  of   the   new  machinery  and   chemical  processes. f

The  study   of   physics   has   furnished  the   two  most  characteristic forces  of   modern  civilization,  steam  and  electricity.  Steam  has been  put   to   three  great   uses:  first,   the   stationary  steam-engine, used  first   in   the   mines,   which  now  replaces  animal  and   natural forces  in   all   the   great   industries,  spinning  and   weaving,  and   even in   agriculture  for   threshing  and  reaping;  secondly,  the   steam-

*   For   example,  the   electric  telegraph  and   steamboats.
- f The  following  table  gives,   where  estimate  is   possible,  some  approximate figures   on   the   increase  in   annual  production,  in   millions  of   tons:

| Coal,   | ....   |      |   England. 1850 64 |   France. 4 |   Germany. 5 | Belgium. 6   |
|---------|--------|------|--------------------|-------------|--------------|--------------|
| "       |        | 1887 |              162   |        20   |         60   | 18           |
| Iron,   | ....   | 1850 |                2.2 |         0.4 |          0.2 |              |

"  1887  7-5  1-5  4 The  total  production  of   gold   is   estimated  at   $600,000,000  from  1800  to 1848;   from  1848   to   1890   at   $5,000,000,000.

ship,   which  has   quickened  transportation  by   water;  and,   thirdly, the   locomotive  and   the   railroad,  which  have  increased  in   vast  proportion the   power  and  speed   of   transportation  by   land.*  Electricity is   more  recent,  but   has   already   given   us   the   electric  telegraph, both   land   lines   and   submarine  cables,   the   telephone,  electric lighting,   electric  street  cars,   the   galvanic  battery,   and   the phonograph.f

Chemistry  has   given   us   the   greater  number  of   secondary  inventions: chemical  phosphorus  matches  in   place   of   the   steel, which  was  slow  and   hard  to   handle;  chemical  fertilizers,  which have  revolutionized  agriculture;  beet-sugar;  illuminating  gas,   till recently  the   great  means  of   lighting  public   places;   colours  extracted from   coal,   benzine,   and   creosote;  photography  and   heliogravure; new   explosive   materials;  chemical  medicines;  chlorine for   bleaching  and  extracts  for   tanning;  preserved  foods,  the extraction  of   aluminum,  production  of   paper  from  woodpulp,   etc. gravure;

The  biological  sciences  have  made  less   progress,  but   they   have given   us,   in   particular,  ansesthetics,  which  facilitate  surgery,  and antiseptics,  which  have  transformed  the  practice  of   medicine. We  must  not   forget   the   improvement  in   grain-raising  and   cattlebreeding,  resulting  from  methodical  experiments  connected  with the   modern  sciences.

This  summary  review  of   the   principal  inventions  is   enough  to recall  the   mighty   changes  that   have  taken  place   in   our   life.  My object   is   merely   to   show  how  this   material  transformation  has affected  European  politics,  directly  by   changing  the   practical conditions  of   government,  indirectly  by   transforming  the   composition of   society.

New  Means  of   Destruction. - Until  the   middle  of   the   century the   world  was  still   using   the   old   explosive  substances  of   the   end of   the   Middle  Age.   The  armies  of   1814   had   still   only   powder and  guns  with  the  flint-lock;  cannon  had  been  somewhat  improved, but   were  still   loaded   from   the   muzzle.  They   were  shortrange  arms  which  were  slow  to   load   and   inaccurate  in   fire.   Their chief  advantage  was  their  moral  effect;  they   did   not   hinder  a disciplined  troop   from  keeping  themselves  in   a   firm   mass,  com-

*   It   is   estimated  that   the   cost   of   transportation  in   Germany  has   already decreased  in   the   proportion  of   20   to   i.

f Under  the  head  of   physics  come  also  the   optical  instruments,  microscope and   lighthouse  lenses.  Neither  air-balloons  nor   diving   bells   have   as yet   altered  the   conditions  of   life.

43

## 674  TRANSFORMATION  OF  POLITICAL  LIFE.

ing   up   close  to   the   enemy,  and   making   use  of   the   bayonet.  In order  to   join   a   revolt  at   this   time   one  needed  only   a   fowling-piece, powder,  and  balls;   the   difference  in   armament  was  hardly   perceptible between  soldier  and   insurgent,  and   in   a   street  fight   the insurgent,  being   in   shelter,  even  had   the   advantage.

The  new  explosive  substances  have  given   the   governments  a destructive  force  which  has   changed  the   art  of   repression.  The first   was   fulminate  of   mercury,  which  led   to   the   invention  of   percussion caps.   In   1847   came  the   much  more  important  discovery of   the   explosive  property  of   nitric  compositions,  primarily nitroglycerine,  which,  mingled  with  inert  matter,  became,  in   1864, dynamite.  The  new  shattering  explosives,  furnished  by   the   nitric compositions,  which  are  exploded  by   an   instantaneous  chemical combination,  have  a   destructive  force  greatly   superior  to   powder, whose  explosion,  produced  by   heat,  is   much  slower.  Minepowder  was  replaced  by   dynamite,  not  only   for   submarine  mines and   torpedoes,  but   also   in   the   work  of   blasting   for   the   construction of   roads.  Gunpowder,  which  is   still   used,   has   been  replaced for   guns   by   the   new  smokeless  powders,  invented  in   1870,   in   all the   different  countries  independently;  for   artillery  it   has   been replaced  by   compositions  of   nitric  or  picric   acid,   melinite,  roburite,   etc. ery

At   the   same  time  a   revolution  was   introduced  in   the   construction of   arms.  Guns  were  invented  with  central  percussion  and a   prepared  cartridge  loaded  at   the   breech.  .This  has   greatly   increased the   rapidity   and   slightly   increased  the   accuracy  of   the shot.  The  first  application  of   it   was  the   needle-gun  (Dreyse), adopted  for   the   Prussian  infantry  as  early   as  1847,   but   only slowly  imitated  in   the   other  countries.  France  clung   to  the muzzle-loader  (Lefaucheux).  It   was  only   after  the   Prussian  victories of   1866  that  the  breech-loader  became,  under  various forms  (Chassepot,  Mauser,  Martini),  the   weapon  of   all   Europe. A   parallel   evolution  in   artillery   produced  breech-loading  cannon (the   English  Armstrong  gun   in   1854),   perfected  in   Germany (Krupp),  and   later  steel   cannon  and   howitzers,  throwing  shells  by use  of   melinite.  This  revolution  in   arms  was  traceable  to   chemical discoveries.  Smokeless  powder,  by   increasing  the   explosive power,  makes  possible  a   lighter   gun,  a   smaller  ball,   and   a   longer range.  This  was  shown  in   the   weapon  improperly  called  the "   Lebel  gun."

All   these  new  instruments  of   destruction,  so  much  more  efficacious than   the   old   ones,   have   transformed  the   conditions  of

warfare.  The  old   fortified  cities,   incapable  now  of   resistance, have  lost   their   military   role   as   defenders  of   the   frontier.  Nothing is   of   value   now   but   intrenched  camps,  centres  of   supplies  defended by   a   circle  of   detached  forts.  The  use  of   great  masses of   soldiers,  rendered  impossible  by   quick-firing  guns  and   shells, has   given   place   to   the   manoeuvre  of   isolated  sharpshooters,  who shelter  themselves  behind  such  cover  as   the   field   of   action  affords.

There  has   as  yet   been   no  experience  to   show  the   effect  of   this revolution  in   the   art  of   war ; *   military  men  themselves  cannot imagine  what  a  war  would  be   between  two  great   European powers.  But  the   idea  of   it   is   so   frightful  that   it   is   enough   to keep   every  government  from  taking   the   responsibility  of   it.   The progress  of   the   art   of   war   has   made  war  so   hideous  that   no  one dares  to   bring   it   on.   The   chemistry  of   explosives  has   worked in   favour  of   peace.

In   domestic  policy   the   new  arms  have  assured  to   the   governments an   irresistible  force..   No   insurrection  can   be   improvised now  with  chance  weapons  or   by   plundering  the   gunshops.  A battle  is   impossible  between  sporting  guns  and  military  guns; no   barricade  can  resist  the   new  cannon.  It   is   surely   not  a   mere coincidence  that  revolutions  and  insurrections,  so   frequent  in Europe  until  1848,   should  have  entirely  ceased  since  the   transformation in   arms.  A   German  socialist,  Bebel,  gave  this  explanation in   1890:   "I   have  already  told   what  the   result  of   a revolution  would  be,   carried  on   by   200,000  men  at   most,   in   this epoch   of   repeating  guns  and   Maxim  cannon;  we  should  be   miserably shot   down   like   sparrows."

There  is   no   longer   any   way   to   overturn  a   legal   government, not  even  to   defend  a   constitution  against  the   executive  power. The  civil  population  has   lost   its   only   effective  means  of   resistance to   abuse   of   power   by   the   government.

The  art  of   revolutionary  attempts  has   also   been  transformed by   explosives.  The  old-fashioned  "   infernal  machine,"  such  as that   used   against   Louis  Philippe,  has   been  replaced  by   dynamite bombs  (Tsar  Alexander  in  1881).  These  terrifying  methods have  given   isolated  individuals  a  means  of   forcing  public   attention and   taking   on   the   appearance  of   a   party;  they   have   not added  to   the   real   power  of   the   revolutionary  parties,   and   have

*The  transformation  was  only   just   beginning  at   the   time   of   the   FrancoPrussian  War  in   1870.  The  Russo-Turkish  War  of   1877   and   the   ServoBulgarian  War  of   1885   employed  only   semi-European  armies,  ill   trained and  ill   equipped.

probably  lessened  their  chances  of   success.  Popular  indignation is   excited  by   their   destructive  explosions,  and   in   the   troubled mind  of   the   public   all   the   revolutionary  parties   are   held   jointly responsible.

New  Methods  of   Communication. - The  revolution  in   methods of   communication  has  transformed  political  life   by   three  direct means:  the   telegraph,  railroads,  and  newspapers.

One  of   the   political   difficulties  in   government  had   always   lain in   the   slowness  of   communication;  to   issue  an  order  from  the central  authority,  to   receive  a   report   from  local  agents,  the   old means  of   transportation,  courier  or  ship,   were  so  slow  that   often an  order  did   not  arrive  in   time  to   be   carried  out.  This  weakened the   influence  of   the   central  authority   or  even  made  it   powerless: an   ill-defined  power   had   to   be   intrusted  to   the   local  agents, and  even  the   diplomatic  agents   in   distant  countries  had  to   be practically  left   to   their  own  discretion.  All   hope   of   receiving information  from  these  agents  in   season  to   exercise  any  control over  them  had  to   be   given   up. less

Aerial  telegraphy,  as   invented  by   Chappe,  was  regarded  as  a great  advance,  but   it   could  transmit  only   a   few   messages  and only   on  a   clear   day.   Electrical  telegraphy,  established  after  1850, enabled  governments  to   keep   themselves  informed  and  to   take instantaneous  action  at   any   distance.  The   effect  was  quickly  felt in   diplomacy,  where  the   government,  informed  of   the   smallest episodes,  assumed  the  management  of   all   affairs,  and  reduced its   agents  to   mere  instruments  of   transmission.  In   domestic affairs  the   telegraph  has   greatly   quickened  the   relations  between government  and  agent,  although  there  still  exist  in   administration many  survivals  of   the   period   before  telegraphy  was   introduced, in   the   form  of   writings  which  have  now  become  useless but  which  the  governments  have  forgotten  to  suppress.  The telegraph,  by   strengthening  the   action  of   the   central  power,   has increased  centralization.

Railroads  have  revolutionized  the   postal   system,  an   institution of   long   standing,  but   hampered  by   difficulty  in   transmission;  it has   now  at   its   disposal  a   means  of   transportation  which  allows indefinite  increase  in   the   volume  of   mail-matter  and   a   wonderful decrease  in   the   cost  of   postage.  There  were  in   Europe,  in   1890, according  to  the  statistics  of   the   international  postal   service, 90,000  post   offices,  and   they   had   handled  10,000,000,000  letters and   packages.  The  railroads,  roads,  and  post   offices,  by   facilitating the   movements  of   persons  and   letters,   have   greatly   pro-

mated  all   branches  of   public   service  and  political  life.  They have  permitted  the   establishment  of   an  administration  which,  by regular  and  continuous  action,  reaches  the  inhabitants  of   the most  remote  districts.  They   have  caused  the   disappearance  of the   oases  of   barbarism  which  were  preserved  in   Europe,  even  in the   heart  of   the   most  civilized  countries.  The  police   system, organized  everywhere  on  the   model  of   the   French  gendarmerie, has   finally   succeeded,  thanks  to   the   network  of   roads,  in   suppressing highway   robbery   in   Europe,   even  in   the   forest  and mountain  districts.

All   the   inhabitants  have  entered  into  public   life   by   regular relations  with  the   agents  of   justice,   taxation,  military  recruiting, and  administration.  The  new  means  of   communication  have brought  the   government  close  to   those  who  pay   its   taxes  or  need the   attention  of   its   courts  and   administrative  officers.  Their  relations have   thus   been   made  at   once  more  efficacious  and   less onerous.  The  improved  communications  have  also  been  of   advantage to   the   political   parties   by   facilitating  the   propagation  of doctrine  and  the   presence  of   their  leaders  at   their  gatherings  all over  the   country.

The  press   has   been  revolutionized  by   machinery, - the   steam press  made  in   1814   for   the   English  Times,  the   composing  machine, then   the   rotary   press;   these,   by   lessening   the   time   necessary for   the   mechanical  work,   permit   the   production  of   an enormous  number  of   copies   in   a   very  short  time  and   at   slight expense.*  The  daily   political  newspaper,  which  was  a   luxury reserved  for   subscribers  of   the   middle  class,   has   reached  the masses  as   buyers   of   single   copies.  The   governments  systematically attempted   to   keep   the   papers   from   reaching   the   multitude, first   by   the   stamp   duty,   contrived  in   England  in   the   eighteenth century;  then  by   the   deposit-pledge,  invented  in   France  in   1819; or   by   a   tax   on   paper.   These  fiscal   devices  were  aided  by   prosecutions against   the   press   and   suppression  through   administrative channels,  which  during  the  reaction  against  the   revolution  of 1848   produced  a  very  noticeable  effect  on  the   sale   of   papers. But  the   cheap   newspaper,  in   spite   of   the   hostility  of   the   governments, has   finally   effected  a   definite  entrance  into   the   life   of   all Europe.f

*   To   show  this   reduction  in   time  an   American  has   calculated  that   what may  now  be   done  in   one   hour  would  formerly  have  taken  100   days   (72,000 sheets).
- f Complete  figures  for   calculating  this  progression  are  wanting;  but   the yearly  circulation,  which  in   the   large   countries  was  counted  by   millions,  is

'Now  the   daily   paper,   by   its   incomparable  powers  of   reaching the   masses,  is   in   modern  society   the   instrument  of   publicity,  not only   for   commerce,  but   for   politics.  For  acts  of   government, laws,   orders,   and   judicial   decrees,  the   old   methods  of   publishing by   proclamation,  posted  notice,  and  announcement  in  the churches,  have  been  replaced  by   insertion  in   the   newspapers. The  newspaper  has  made  it   useless  to   forbid  the   publication  of ecclesiastical  acts,   and   needless  to   use  the   right   of   petition,  formerly one  of   the   fundamental  liberties.  But  everywhere  the newspaper  influences  public   opinion  in   two  ways:   it   reports  and discusses  the   acts  of   the   government  and   also   of   its   agents,  thus furnishing  the   only   effectual  means  of   protest  against  abuse  of power;  it   expounds  and  spreads  opinions,  the   necessary  condition for   the   formation  of   political   parties.

As   long   as   the   newspaper  was  a   luxury   for   the   wealthy,  the middle  class  had   a   monopoly  of   politics,  control,  and   opposition; the   rest  of   the   population  came  into   political  life   only   by   riots. A   cheap   press  made  it   possible  to   introduce  into   this   inert  mass a   current  of   propagandism  and  opposition,  which  aroused  the political  life   of   the   people   and   started  the   evolution  of   politics   in the   direction  of   democracy.

Adding  to   the   direct  transformations  of   political  life   the   minor services  rendered  to   the   cause  of   good   order  by   the   lighting  of the   streets  and   the   photographing  of   dangerous  persons,  I   think we   have  the   complete  list   of   direct  changes  in   political  conditions. The   indirect  transformations  are  more  numerous,  but   less evident;  it   is   hardly   possible  here  to   indicate  any   but   the   most important  and  the   least  contestable.

Transformation  in   Population. - The  progress  in   industrial  arts has   produced  an   increase  in   the   means  of   subsistence  which  has certainly  contributed  to   the   rapid   and   continuous  growth   of   population all   over  Europe.  The  almost  exact  census  organized  by the   governments  permits  a  measurement  of   its   importance.  The population  of   Europe,  estimated  in   1800  at   about  180,000,000, to-day  exceeds  350,000,000.*  The  growth  has   been  principally now  counted  by   hundreds  of   millions;  the   production  has   increased  more than  a   hundredfold.

*   The  following  table  gives   the  comparative  density  per  square  kilometre, about   one-third  of   a   square  mile,   in   1820   and   1890:

| Germany, 50                                | 91        | England and Wales, 80 192   |
|--------------------------------------------|-----------|-----------------------------|
| ( Cisleithania, Austria,                   | 79        | France, ... 56 71           |
| 47 jTransleithania, Belgium, 138 (in 1840) | 54 206 64 | Italy, ... 107              |

in   the   northern  countries.  The  increase  in   the   number  of   inhabitants does   not   necessarily  influence  political   life   in   itself. There  are  now  in   the   Orient,  and  perhaps  were  in   the   Middle Ages,   very   dense  and   very   inert   masses  of   population ; the   United States,   with   a   density   of   j inhabitants,  has   a   much  more  intense political  life   than  British  India,  with  its   density  of   88.  The political  importance  of   the   increase  of   population  in   the   nineteenth century   has   been   confined  chiefly   to   what   it   has   done   for the   cities  everywhere.

The  cities  in   1814   were  hardly   more  than  centres  of   supplies and  administration  for   the   landlords  and   peasants  of   the   region; the   majority  of   them  were  inhabited  by   small  groups  of   officeholders, artisans,   and   tradesmen,  and   were  placed,   at   wide  intervals, among   a   rural   population;  very   few   exceeded  a   population of   50,000.  The  new  industries,  by   bringing  workmen together  in   thousands,  and  steam  transportation,  by   creating an  enormous  international  commerce  all   over  the   world,  have given   rise   to   a   new  population  of   workingmen  and   commercial employees.  The  old   cities  have  grown  with  unprecedented  rapidity; manufacturing  villages   have  become  large   cities.*  In   certain manufacturing  districts,  notably   in   England,  Germany,  and Belgium,  the   population  has   become  so   dense  as   to   almost  cover the   land.  The   proportion  of   the   city   population  to   the   whole  has increased,  in   France,  from  24   per   cent,  in   1846   to   36   per   cent,   in 1886.  England,  the  first  country  to   enter  upon  this   evolution, had  already,  in   1851,   a   city   population  of   51   per   cent.,  and   in 1890   79   per   cent. tion tain

Now,  the  history  of   the   nineteenth  century  shows  the   large cities  and   manufacturing  districts  all   over  Europe  to   have   been centres  of   revolution  and  of   opposition  to   the   government  and clergy;   it   is   they   particularly  that   have   recruited  the   democratic parties.  The  increase  in   city   population  has   certainly  been   one of   the   material  conditions  in   the   general   evolution  of   Europe   toward democracy.

Increase  in   Wealth. - Machinery,  by   bringing  to   the   service  of industry  the   unlimited  forces  of   nature,   has   led   to   the   production of   a   much  greater  number  of   objects   in   a   shorter  space  of   time,

*In  1880  there  were  in   Europe  4   cities  with  a   population  exceeding 1,000,000;  6   between  1,000,000  and  500,000;  25   between  500,000  and 200,000;  40   between  200,000  and  100,000;  in   all   178   exceeding  50,000.  The total  population  of   the  great  cities  exceeding  500,000  was  11,000,000;  in 1890   it   exceeded  14,000,000.

## 68o  TRANSFORMATION  OF  POLITICAL   LIFE.

and  consequently  has  caused  goods  to   be   sold  at   much  lower prices.*  Steam  transportation  has  permitted  Europe  to   import at   low   prices   the   raw  materials  and   agricultural  products  of   the whole  world,  while  at   the   same  time  her   own  agriculture  has been  growing  more  productive  by   underdraining,  rotation  of crops,  chemical  fertilizers,  and   intensive  cultivation.  A   parallel increase  in   the   production  of   gold   and   silver  has   for   a   long   time prevented  a   corresponding  fall   in   prices. f   But   the   increase  in production  and  the   increase  in   money   have  worked  together,  increasing the   abundance  of   useful  objects  and  the   ease  of   procuring them.  This   is   shown  in   two  ways :   increased  consumption of   goods   and   increased  accumulation  of   capital.

The  increase  in   comforts  of   life   has   been  so  rapid   and   has so  profoundly  altered  social  habits  that   it   is   difficult  to   imagine the   simple   life   of   the   beginning  of   the   century.  The  luxury   of the   wealthy  has   become  almost  a   burden.  But  everywhere  the increase  in   commodities  has   penetrated  to   the   masses  and   relieved their  condition.  Many   things   that  were  formerly  luxuries  have become  articles  of   general  use:  sugar,  coffee,  chocolate,  linen, cotton  and  silk  stuffs,   wall-paper,  ready-made  clothing,  furniture, windows,  dishes,   candles  and  lamps,   books,  newspapers, music,  theatres,  and  pictures.

By   a   parallel  evolution,  filthy   ways  of   living,   which  in   the eighteenth  century  prevailed  among  all   classes  in   all   countries, have  become  a  reproach  among  civilized  people  and  no   longer exist  in   Europe   except   in   the   south  and   east  or   in   the   poorest portion  of   the   community.  Cleanliness  of   body,   linen,   house, and  food  tend  to   become  a  moral  obligation  and  begin   to   be spread  by   the   schools  into  the   remotest  parts   of   the   country. Public  cleanliness  comes  with  personal  cleanliness;  street  sweeping, sewers,  and   drains,   almost  unknown  in   1814,   have  become indispensable  institutions  in   all   the   cities.  A   public   feeling   of

*   The   saving   in   labour  and   time   varies  greatly   according  to   the   industry. Taking  as  a   measure  the   number  of   workmen  which  would  have  been  formerly necessary  to   manufacture  the   quantity  produced  to-day   by   a   single workman,  the   following  estimates  by   experts  give   some  idea  of   the  difference:

Boots,         ....     5   for  i       I   Weaving,     ...        30   for   i

Hats,         ....     6    "           I

Spinning,     .        .        .      noo

Printing,       .        .        .      about  1000   for   i fThe  great   development  of   deposit  banking,  and  the  use  of   cheques and   bank  notes  instead  of   coin,   have  perhaps  done  as  much  to   prevent  a fall   of   prices   as   has   the   increased  production  of   the   precious  metals.

disgust  and  shame  has   compelled  the   clearing  away  of   the   infected dwellings   and   alleys   in   which  the   poor  of   the   great   cities had  been  allowed  to   bury   themselves.

The  manual  labourer  of   to-day   has   as  many  opportunities  for enjoyment  and  mental  culture,  as  much  refinement  in   his   surroundings, as   the   lower  middle  class  had   in   1814.   Also,   he   has been  enabled  to   take   part   in   politics   without  causing   the   reaction of   barbarism  which  men  of   experience  predicted  and  which seemed  an   invincible  argument  against  universal  suffrage.

Only   a   part   of   the   abundance  produced  by   the   new   industrial system  has   been  consumed;  the   rest  has   become  savings.  It   is impossible  to   express  by   figures   the   savings  accumulated  since 1814,   even   in   a   single   country;   *   the   estimates  rest  on  a   too   uncertain and   varying   basis   of   conjectural  reasoning.  But   it   is   certain that   it   represents  a   capital   at   least   double  the   sum  of   the   capital left   by   all   past   centuries.  Of   this   new  capital   a   part   has   served to   buy   the   new  stock  of   tools  for   manufacture  and   commerce, and  is   represented  by   the   railroads  and  factories;  the   rest   has been  lent   to   the   governments  for   war  and   armament,  and   is   represented by   government  bonds. f   This  enormous  mass  of   disposable capital   has   revolutionized  the   financial  conditions  of government;  it   has   made  possible  an   increase  of   taxation,  expenditure, and   debts  in   proportions  which  would  formerly  have seemed  intolerable.  It   has   also   made  it   easy   to   undertake  a   war on  credit  and  to   pass  on  the   debt   to   future  generations.  Thus have  increased  the   economic  power  of   the   government  and   the influence  of   the   representative  assemblies  invested  with   the   management of   these  enormous  budgets.

Transformation  of   Economic  Life. - The  quicker  and  cheaper methods  of   transportation  have  produced  a  revolution  in   the economic  activity  of   civilized  nations.  Formerly,  the   labouring classes  produced  hardly  enough  for   their  own  consumption  or for   the   local  market;  the   peasants  did   little  selling   and   almost no   buying;  artisans  laboured  only   for   local  clients.  The   larger industry  of   the   time,   and   even  the   foreign   commerce,  were  con-

*   Mulhall  estimates  the  whole  savings  of   England,  from  1815   to   1880,   at $17,000,000,000,  and  the   annual  savings  of   the   world  at   about  $2,400,000,000. ·[England's   debt  was  already  formed  in   1814,  amounting  in   1820  to $4,200,000,000,  and  has  since  decreased.  But  for   the   whole  of   Europe national  debts  have  increased  from  $6, 800,000,000  in   1820  to   $20, 400,000,000 in   1881.  The  annual  expenses  of   the  central  governments  for   all   Europe have  increased  from  $1,000,000,000  in   1830   to   $3,000,000,000  in   1881.

fined  almost  entirely  to  articles  of   luxury  made  in   certain factories  and  colonial  products  from  over  the  sea.  In   the nineteenth  century,  by   an  evolution  already  begun   in   England between  1789   and  1814,   producers,  and  even  cultivators,  have come  to   work  no  more  for   themselves  or  even  for   known  customers, but   only   for   the   market,   and   not   now  the   local   market, but   the   market  of   the   world.

The  system  of   joint   stock  companies  has   developed  rapidly  in its   application  to   large   industrial  enterprises,  while  the   issues  of government  bonds  have  increased  with  the  rapid  increase  of loans.  Thus  has  been  created  an  enormous  quantity  of   new personal  property,  easily   passed   from  one   holder  to   another,  and therefore  forming  a   favourite  subject   of   speculation.

The  management  of   production  has   thus  passed  into  the   control of   groups  of   speculators  who  direct  the   world's  market,  settle prices,   order  the   goods   to   be   produced,  and   determine  the   values of   stocks  and   government  bonds.  The  Commercial  Exchange and  the   Stock  Exchange  have  become  the  directing  centres  of the   economic  life   of   nations.*

This  new  power  has  effected  a  profound  change  in   political conditions.  The  new  aristocracy  of   personal  wealth,  bankers, manufacturers,  and  merchants,  though  held  at  arm's  length  by the   old   landed  aristocracy,  has   made  a   place   for   itself   in   politics, by   furnishing  the   mainstay  of   the   liberal  parties,  and   trying   to guide   the   democratic  mass  of   the   nation.  Lucrative  industrial enterprises  and   large   speculations  depended  directly  on   the   state, in   its   action  touching  customs  duties,  loans,   and   concessions  of public   works;  they   depended  indirectly  on  the   press,   by   reason of   its   power  of   publicity.  The   financial  aristocracy  has   tried  to gain   ascendency  over  the   government,  the   legislative  bodies,  and the   press.  In   what  measure  it   has   succeeded  in   the   different countries  of   Europe  is   still   a  secret  history   which  I   have  not attempted  to   relate.  But   the   power  of   speculation  over  the   political rulers   of   the   states   has   certainly   been   one  of   the   characteristics of   the   political   life   of   the   nineteenth  century.

*   The  importance  of   the  Stock  Exchange  is   shown  in   the  number  of stocks  of   all   sorts  quoted   on   Exchange: 1815.  London,  .  .  30  Paris,  ,  .  15  Berlin,  .  .  n J877.  "  .  .  1307  "  553  "  613

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.- See  "   Handworterbuch  der  Staatswissenschaften," 1890-94,  and  the  1895  supplement  to  the  words  Borse,  Eisenbahnen, Eisen,  Gold,  Anleihen,  Staatschulden,  Silber,  Telegraphic,  etc.,  where the   bibliography  of   each  question  is   given. - See   also   W.   Cunningham,  "   The Growth  of   English  Industry  and  Commerce  .   .   ."

WORKS. - I   am  not  acquainted  with  the  complete  scientific  history  of modern  inventions.  Many  of   the   details  are  given   in   the   popular  works  : Figuier,  "Les  Merveilles  de  la   Science";  "L'annee  Scientifique  "   (published annually   since  1855)  ;   "   Das   Neue  Buch  der   Erfmdungen  .  .  .," 6   vols.,   1864-67.

For  comparative  statistics  of   wealth  and  population  :   Kolb,   "   Handbuch der  Vergleichenden  Statistik,"  ist  edit,  1857,  8th  edit,  1879   (Eng. translation,  "   Condition  of   Nations,"  1880),   the   most  reliable  work  of   this kind. - Mulhall,  "   Dictionary  of   Statistics,"  new  edit.,   1886;   handy,  but unreliable.

C.D,  Wright,  "The  Industrial  Evolution  of   the   United  States,"  1895,   an intelligent  sketch  of   the   industrial  history  of   the   world  in   its   relation  to the   United  States.

For  the   evolution  in   France:  Rambaud,  "   Hist,  of   Modern  Civilization  in France,"  1888. - For  England:  W.  Cunningham,  "   Growth  of  English Industry  and  Commerce  .  .  .,"   1892,   very   instructive,  indicating  special histories  of   commerce  (Levi,   Yeats,)   and   the   different  trades  (Baines,   cotton; Bischoff,  woollens,  etc,),

## CHAPTER  XXIIL

## THE    CHURCH    AND    THE    CATHOLIC    PARTIES.

The   Church  before  the   Revolution. - The  political  history   of   the Catholic  Church  in   the   nineteenth  century  is   the   history   of   the relations  between  Church  authority  and  lay   authorities.*  To understand  the   conflicts  which  have  filled  the   century,  one  must know  how  the   question  stands  between  the   governments  and  the clergy,   and   what  powers  they   dispute.  But   it   is   hardly   possible to   realize  the   position  of   the   clergy   in   contemporary  society without  reviewing  the  organization  of   the   Church  before  the Revolution.

The  principle  of   all   Christian  nations  since  the   Middle  Ages was  that   all   Christian  society   must  obey   at   once  two  authorities: the   lay   sovereign  governs  the   body,   the   church  sovereign  the soul;   they   share  the   power  and   mutually  support  each  other. The  right   of   governing  souls  implies,  to   enforce  obedience,  a material  power;  so  the   Church  demanded  a  share  of   public authority.

The  Church  had  need  of   absolute  independence  to   fulfil  its divine  mission.  It   must  therefore,  like   the   state,   form  a   body capable  of   being   sufficient  to   itself,   what  is   called  a   "   complete society   "   (societas   perfectd).  It   had   its   organization  parallel   with that   of   the   state:  its   sovereign  power   (the   Pope   and   council), its   officials  (the   clergy   organized  in   a   hierarchical  body),   its   laws and   its   legal   principles,  decreed  by   itself  (the   canons  and   canon

*   The  technical  term  for   these  is   relations  of   church  and  state.  A Church  history  would  give   an  opportunity  to   study   the  relations  of   the different  churches  with  the   state  in   the   various  countries  of   Europe.  The Protestant  and  Orthodox  Greek  churches,  being  national  churches  subordinated to   the   lay   sovereign,  have  no  common  political  history.  There may   be   from  one  country  to   another  personal  relations  and  sympathies between  the   members  of   the   same  church;  but  there  is   no   international Protestant  or   Orthodox  party,  because  these  churches  have  no  general organization.  The  Catholic  Church  alone,  being  universal,  forms  an   international body   directed  by   a   single   head,   independent  of   all   the   governments. Its   members,  whose  bond  of   union  is   superior  to   the   dividing  lines of   states,  are  grouped  in   international  Catholic  parties. 684 ments.

law),   its   ecclesiastical  courts,  its   procedure  and   its   prisons,  its domains  and  its   taxes  (the   tithe's) ; it   had   the   power   to   give   commands and   inflict   punishments  on   its   subjects.

All   laymen  were  members  of   the   Church  and  subject  to   the clergy  in   religious  matters.  The  clergy  regulated  matters  of faith,   worship,  and   morals ; they   prescribed  all   that   laymen   should believe,  say,   and   do,   and   their   orders  were  obligatory.  They   dispensed the   sacraments  with   a   sovereign  hand,   including  marriage, one   of   the   chief   acts   of   private   life.   They   kept   the   registers of   births  and   deaths.  They   directed  schools  and   education,  hospitals, and   public   charities.  They   supervised  speech   and   writings and   subjected  publications  to   their  censorship.

The  practice  of   religion,  being   an  obligation  of   public   interest, must  be   imposed  on  all   laymen,  even  by   force,   just   as  respect   for decency  and  good   order  was  imposed  on  them.  As   the   Church has   no  physical  means  of   constraint,  the   state  lent   its   strength. The  clergy  decreed  the   religious  duties  to   be   imposed  on  the faithful,  denounced  omissions,  and  pronounced  condemnations. The  government  offered  its   services  in   enforcing  decisions;  it forced  the   monks  and   nuns  to   fulfil  their   vows  ; it   forced  laymen to   obey   the   clergy,   to   practice   their   religion   regularly,  to   attend the   services,  to   fast,   to   confess,  to   be   married  and   buried  by   the clergy,   and   to   have   their   children  instructed  in   religious  matters. It   forbade  the   books  condemned  by   Church  censorship,  and   executed the   judgments  of   the   Church  courts.

In   every   Catholic  country  there  existed  a  compact  between Church  and  state,  with  three  conditions:  I.   independent  organization of   the   clergy;   2.   power  of   the   clergy   to   issue   orders  to   all laymen;  3.   assistance  of   the   lay   government  in   maintaining Church  authority.  In   this   regime   members  of   the   clergy   were free   from  lay   authority;  the   government  could  not   impose  on clerks  any   temporal  charge,  either  tax  or  military  service - not even  the   obligation  to   appear   before  its   courts.  On   the   contrary, members  of   the   government,  as  members  of   the   Church,  were subject  to   the   religious  authority  of   the   clergy;   they   must  place themselves  at   its   service  to   carry  out   its   orders.  The   division of   power   into   spiritual   and   temporal  did   not  even  assure  to   the lay   power  a  share  of   independent  sovereignty,  for   the   clergy alone  drew  the   dividing  lines  between  the   two   domains  and   decided which   affairs  belonged  within  its   own.  Thus  the   clergy gave  orders,  but  received  none.  It   was  the   theory   formulated by   Boniface  in   the   bull   Unam  Sanctam:  Christ  has   institute4  two

swords - the  one  spiritual,  belonging  to  the   Church,  the   other temporal,  belonging  to  the   princes;  but   the   princes  must  wield their  sword  according  to   the   wish  of   the   Pope;   it   is   a   Manichean heresy  to   recognise  an   independent  lay   power  side   by   side   with the   ecclesiastical  power,   for   every   human  being   is   subject   to   the Pontiff.  The  Church  is   superior  to   the   state.

In   practice,  however,  laymen  had  imposed  an   inverse  system on  the   Church.  The  government,  even  in   the   states  which  had remained  Catholic,  had  subordinated  the   Church  to   the   state.* The  clergy   no   longer   form  an   independent  body;   they   are  subject to   lay   taxes  and   courts.  They   have  no   longer   their  selfgoverning  organization;  the  prelates,  heads  of   the   clergy,  are chosen  by   the   lay   government.  They   have  not  retained  even their  sovereignty  in   religious  matters;  the   government  has   imposed on   them   a   supervision  which  is   expressed  in   similar  forms throughout  the   great   Catholic  states:  the   placet,   the   government authorization  required  before  publishing  any   decision  by   the Church  authorities;  the   exequatur,  the   government  confirmation necessary  for   the   execution  of   an  order;  the   recur sus  ab   abusu, the   right   of   the   lay   courts  to   break  through  an  ecclesiastical sentence.

This  system   did   not   do   away  with   compulsory  Church  authority; the   state   continued  to   force   its   subjects   to   practice   religion and  obey   the   clergy.  But   in   a   number  of   states  the   religious contests  which  followed  the   Reformation  had   led   to   compromises contradictory  to  the  fundamental  principle  of   the  Catholic Church,  unity   of   faith.  The  government  permitted  laymen  to substitute  the   practice  of   another  religion   for   that   of   Catholicism; Catholic  believers  remained  subject  to  clerical  authority,  while non-Catholics  were  exempt  from  it.  This  system  took  two forms :   Toleration,  or   "   private   exercise  of   religion,"  maintained the   superiority  of   the   State   Church  and   simply   tolerated  the   other religions  in   an   inferior  position;  this   was  the   system  which  had prevailed  in   Austria  since  Joseph  II.,   and  in   France  since Louis  XVI.  Parity,  practised  in   the   German  states  and  in   Hun-

*   In   Protestant  as  well  as   Orthodox  states,  the  sovereign  has   become che   official  head  of   the   Church;  this  is   Ctesaropapism.  The  Reformation did   not   establish  liberty   of   conscience  ; but  in   breaking  up   the  Church  it established  little  churches  too  weak  to   maintain  their  authority,  churches in   which  the   clergy   have  become  the   servants  of   the   lay   power.  The   government, subject   to   the   absolute  will   of   the   lay   sovereign,  has   gradually become  indifferent  to   religion  and  has   finally   become  a   lay   state.  In   this sense  the   Reformation  prepared  the   way   for   revolution.

gary,  consisted  in   maintaining  several  state  churches  side  by side,   equally   supported  by   the   government,  and   each  obligatory for   its   own  members  (this   system  was  combined  with  toleration for  unrecognised  creeds).  Spain  and  Italy   alone  preserved Catholic  unity   and   official  intolerance.*  The  others  had   adopted the   system  of   toleration  and   superiority  of   the   lay   power.

Meanwhile  the  governments,  to  make  the   Catholic  clergy   still more  dependent  on  the   lay   sovereign,  had   diminished  the   authority of   the   ecclesiastical  sovereign,  the   Pope.   A   number  of Catholic  states  even  attempted  to  establish  a  national  Church, joined   to   the   universal  Church  by   the   ties   of   a   common  faith, but   with  a   distinct  national  organization  and   its   own  particular form  of   liturgy;   examples  are  the   Galilean  Church  in   France,  the doctrine  of   Febronius  in   Germany,  and   in   Austria  Josephism.

Thus,  from  the   period   of   "   enlightened  despotism  "   the   Church preserved  its   privileges,  estates,  and  endowments,  exemption from  military  service  for   the   clergy,   special   system  of   taxation, and  pre-eminence  marked  by   honours  and  precedence  in   ceremonies; it   even  retained  an  effective  authority,  supervision  over the   conduct  of   laymen,  censorship  of   books,  the   control  of   marriage and   records  of   vital   statistics.  It   was  still   a   system   of   collaboration between  government  and   clergy.   But   the   churchmen had   descended  to   the   rank  of   officials  under  the   lay   power. The  Pope   alone,  at   once  the   head  of   the   Church  and   a   temporal prince,   remained  an   independent  sovereign  and   maintained  in   the Catholic  Church  an   independent  spiritual  authority,  at   least  in matters  of   faith  and   worship.  His   political  influence,  however, was  weakened.

The  Revolution  in  the  Church. - The  old  church  system, greatly   shaken  by   the   Reformation,  was  overturned  by   the   Revolution. The   Republican  party,   which  controlled  the   French  Convention of   1792  and  the   Directory,  adopted  a  radical  solution already  tried  in   the   United  States.  They   established  the   exclusive preponderance  of   the   lay   power   in   society,   and   systematically destroyed   all   that   remained  of   the   official  Church  institution, all   the   powers  of   the   clergy   over  the   faithful  in   matters  of   convention

*   The   Protestant  countries  were  divided  in   like   manner  between  these three  systems:  England  and  the  Netherlands  had  tolerance  and   Prussia parity,   while  the   Scandinavian  countries  tolerated  none  but   the   Lutheran Church.  The  Orthodox  countries  retained  in   principle  compulsory  religion and  Church  unity;  in   the   Ottoman  Empire  the   Sultan  imposed  the   belief which  it   pleased  him  to   recognise,  and  in   the   Russian  Empire  the   Tsar had  guaranteed  the  preservation  of   the   Church  of   each  country  annexed.

## 688  THE   CHURCH  AND    THE   CATHOLIC  PARTIES.

duct,   education,  and   civil   records.  The   Revolution  had   deprivid the   Church  of   its   courts,  tithes,  estates,  all   its   honorary  privileges, and   even  cancelled  its   religious   vows.  Religion  became a   purely   personal  matter,  freed  from  all   outside  authority;  the clergy   lost   all   means  of   material  constraint,  even  over  Church members.  All  public   institutions,  marriage,  registration,  education, charity,   and   burials,   were  made  independent  of   the   Church; there  remained  nothing  but  lay   power.  This  marks  the   complete separation  of   Church  and   state,   the   complete  indifference of   the   government  in   religious  matters,  the   absolute  liberty   and equality  of   all   creeds - a   system   directly   opposed   to   that   of   the Middle  Ages.

Napoleon  I.   restored  the   system  of   "   enlightened  despotism  " and  the   Gallican  Church.  By   the   Concordat  with  the   Pope   he recognised  the   Church  as  an  official  institution;  he   officially  restored the   clerical   hierarchy   and   granted   it   its   official  honours, a   state  appropriation,  exemption  from  military  service,  and   the right   of   having   colleges.  But   to   this   restored  clergy   he   granted no  authority  over  laymen,  no  control  of   civil  records,  no  censorship, nor   supervision  of   schools,   no  material  power  over   its members,  no  compulsory  vows  nor  means  of   coercion.  He   left them  not  even  the   internal  liberty   accorded  to   every  private   religious society   where   the   separation  of   Church  and   state   is   established. He   made  them  subject  to   the   lay   government  as  a   body of   office-holders,  and   revived  the   old   royal   powers  over  the   Gallican Church.  This  was  the   Gallican  Church,  with  all   its   subjection to   lay   authority,  but   without  its   authority  over   individuals.' with   the   state.  But   to   this   Concordat,  concluded  in   the   form  of articles.  These  were  simple   laws,   the   exclusive  work  of   the   lay power,  which,  in   spite   of   protests  from  the   Pope,   regulated,  in lished.

Of   the   old   church  system  Napoleon  had  restored  only   the forms  and   the   supervising  power  of   the   lay   government.  Of   the Revolution  he   preserved  the   fundamental  principle,  religious  liberty and   equality,   and   the   withdrawal  of   all   public   authority   from the   clergy.  For  the   government  this  was  the   system  of   "   enlightened despotism,"   for   individuals  it   was  the   system  of   the Revolution.  The  form  of   the   Concordat  concealed  this  revolutionary character  by   recognising  in   the   Church  the   right   to   treat a   treaty   between  two  powers,  Napoleon  added  the  organic a   sense  contrary  to   canon  law,   the   "   general  relations  of   the Church  with  state  laws  and  police."  They  imposed  on  the Church  the   old   forms  of   lay   supremacy:  appeal   to   the   Council

of   State   on  questions  of   clerical  powers,  government  authorization for   publishing  papal   acts,   for   sending   nuncios,  holding   councils, establishing  festivals,  and   creating   parishes.

The  Concordat,  or  a  similar  system,  was  extended  to   all   the states  under  the   rule  or   influence  of   Napoleon,  that  is,   all   the Catholic  states  except   Austria  and   Portugal.  It   overturned  the organization  of   the   Catholic  Church  in   Europe  and  simplified the   relations  between  Church  and  state.  In   all   the   countries, the   Church,  while  fully   preserving  the  character  of   an  official state  institution,  was  deprived  of   every  means  of   constraint  and treated  as  a   dependency  of   the   government.  It   was  weakened at   the   same  time  by   systematic  secularizations,  which  abolished the   old   religious   orders  and   Church  estates;  in   Germany  the   lay princes  suppressed  the   states  of   the   ecclesiastical  princes,  with over  3,000,000  inhabitants,  and   divided  them  among  themselves. Napoleon  himself  annexed  the   Papal   States  to   his   Empire.

The  Kestoration  of   the   Church. - The  Allies,  after  defeating Napoleon,  restored  the   Papal   States  to   the   Pope,   with  the   exception of   Avignon.  But  this  was  the   only   ecclesiastical  state that  was  restored.  The  Church,  having  been  part   of   the   old regime,   had   been  overturned  by   the   Revolution,  but   it   was  re-established by   the   Restoration.  The  restored  lay   sovereigns  restored the   Church  organization.  It   was   for   them  a   conscientious duty   to   set   up   the   legitimate  Church  again   at   the   same  time   as the   legitimate  monarchy,  and  an  act  of   conservative  policy   to restore  the   naturally  conservative  authority  of   the   clergy.  The Legitimists  demanded  "   the   union  of   throne  and   altar,"  the   alliance of   government  and  clergy.  This  was  the   theory  of   the   legitimist school,   Chateaubriand,  de   Maistre,   Haller,   and   Schlegel ; it   was  put   in   practice   by   the   governments.  The   two  powers, menaced  by   the  Revolution,  saw  their  common  interest,  and joined   hands  to   fight   the   common  enemy.

Relations  between  the   two  powers  were,   however,  regulated  in different  ways.  The  Pope   made  full  restoration  in   his   states; he   restored  the   convents  that   had   been  suppressed  by   the   Revolution, and   even,   abandoning  a   decision  that   had   been   enforced by   the   former  monarchies,  restored  the   Jesuit   Society,  by   a   solemn bull,*   in   April,   1814,   without  consulting  the   governments.

*This  society,  abolished  by   the  Pope   in   1773,   had   in   reality   been   perpetuated in   non-Catholic  states,  Russia  and  Prussia,  and   under  another name,  Fathers  of   the   Faith,  in   the   Catholic  states.  It   had   already   been re-established  in   the   Kingdom  of   Sicily.

44

The  absolutist  monarchies  of   Spain   and   Portugal,  and   those  of Italy,   except   for   the   Austrian  provinces  and   Tuscany,  also   returned to   the   old   ecclesiastical  system.  They   restored  unity   of faith  (compulsory  Catholicism),  Church  courts,  tithes,  Church estates,  religious  orders,  and  clerical  control  of   marriage  and registration.

The  two  great   Catholic  monarchies  preserved  state  control  of the   Church  and   religious  liberty.  Austria  preserved  Josephism with  toleration,  France  the   Napoleonic  Concordat  with  equality of   creeds.  They   restored  neither  compulsory  unity   of   faith,   nor independence  of   the   Church;  France  did   not  even  restore  the religious  orders  nor  the   Church  domains  that   the   Revolution  had destroyed.  The  Pope   protested  against  the   Charter,*  an  exclusively lay   document  in   which  there  was  no  mention  of   the   Catholic Church,   "   not  even  of   the   name  of   God   ";   against   Article  22, which  established  "   liberty   of   creed  and   conscience  "   and   "   promised protection   to   ministers  of   what   are  called  the   denominations," putting  "on   a   level   with   heretical  sects  and   even  Jewish   perfidy the   Holy   Spouse   of   Christ,  the   Church  outside  of   which  there could  be   no  salvation  "  ;   against   Article  23,   on   the   press,   "   liberty which  threatens  morals  and   faith."

In   Germany,  the   Church  of   the   times  before  the   Revolution was  not  restored;  not  only   the   ecclesiastical  principalities,  but the   convents,  remained  suppressed.  The  plan   of   a  single   regulation for   the   whole  Confederation  fell   through.  A   new  Church with  new  districts  was  established  by   special   agreement  between the   Pope   and   the   government  of   each   state.  Bavaria  alone  gave to   this   agreement  the   form  of   a   concordat  (1817);   it   recognised in   the   Church  the   "   rights   and   privileges  which  appertain  to it   by   divine  order  and   canon  law,"   but   the   Concordat  was  promulgated with   an   edict   similar  to   Napoleon's  organic   articles, which,  in   spite   of   the   protests  of   the   Pope,   guaranteed  religious liberty.  In   the   other  German  states,  the   Church  was  organized by   a  series  of   papal   bulls  concerted  with  the   governments. Everywhere  the  government  preserved  its  power  over  the Church,  and  even  continued,  as   in   the   eighteenth  century,  to interfere  in   the   regulating  of   details  in   purely   Church  matters, liturgy,   festivals,  and   pilgrimages.

The  Restoration  re-established  only   an   impoverished  and   subordinated Church.

*   This  was  really   against  the   constitution  drafted  by   the   Senate,  but   the incriminated  articles  passed  into  the  Charter.  See  p   231   for  a  similar protest  against  the  constitution  of   the   Kingdom  of   the   Netherlands.

The   Ultramontane  Party,- From  the   crisis  of   the   Revolution the  Church  emerged  transformed  in   spite   of   herself.  While everyone  thought  her   enfeebled  she   found  herself  fortified.  The clergy  of   the   eighteenth  century,  with  its   aristocratic  and   imperfectly centralized  constitution,  had   many  privileges  and   apparent authority;  yet   it   had   little   activity   and   little   influence  on society.  The  cultivated  classes  did  not  obey   it,   and   over  the masses  its   influence  remained  local,   without  unity   of   aim.  Each great  state  had  its   National  Church,  practically  almost  independent of   the   Pope   and   subject   to   the   government. ent

The  bishops,  those  princes  of   the   Church  who  were  really   lay nobles,  and   the   old   religious  orders,   holders  of   great   estates,  were swept  away   by   the   crisis.  Instead  of   these  instruments  of   aristocracy and   decentralization,  bishops   of   democratic  origin,   fresh from  the  seminaries,  became  the  heads  of   the   clergy;  the   religious orders   of   Roman  origin   were   devoted  to   the   Pope,   especially the   Jesuits,   and   they   took   charge   of   preaching  and   education. The   seminaries  were  reorganized  according  to   the   decrees of   the   Council  of   Trent;  the   dogma   of   the   supremacy  of   the Pope,   taught   to   new  generations,  became  once  more  the   fundamental doctrine  touching   the   organization  of   the   Church. tion.

The  National  Churches,  established  after  the   weakening  of the   papacy   in   the   fourteenth  century,  and   maintained  in   spite   of the   restoration  effected  by   the   Council  of   Trent,  had   still   supporters who   tried   to   resist   this   new  restoration  of   the   papal power;  the  governments  supported  them  in   contempt  of   the Pope.  The  conflict  that  divided  the   Catholics  into  two  parties, national  and  pontifical,  was  especially  sharp   in   France.  The National  Church  there  took  the   form  of   a   doctrine,  the   "   maxims of   the   Gallican  Church"  of   1682;   Napoleon  had   declared  these obligatory  (the   organic   articles,  among  the   "   cases  of   abuse  "   of clerical  authority,  enumerated  "   attempts  against  the   liberties, immunities,  and  customs  of   the  Gallican  Church  ").   The  old struggle  was  reopened  between  the   Galileans  and   U  [tramontanes. The  Gallicans  rested  on   the   lay   power.  Even  after  the   Restoration the   King,   the   ministers,  and   the   administrative  staff   remained Gallicans;  churchmen  in   positions  of   control  were   Gallicans, the   headmaster  of   Frayssinous  University,  the   Superior of   St.   Suplice,   the   archbishops  of   Paris ; the   Jesuits   were  expelled, as  supporters  of   papal   sovereignty,  and   their  order  continued to   be   regarded  as  abolished,  in   spite   of   the   Bull   of   1814.   But the   Ultramontanes  gradually  won  the   mass  of   the   clergy   and

## 692  THE   CHURCH  AND    THE   CATHOLIC  PARTIES.

the  faithful.  A   similar  conflict  and  evolution,  though  less marked,  occurred  in   Germany.  The  result  was  to   replace  the former  aristocratic  national  clergy,   half   officials  of   the   state,   by a   democratic  clergy  subject  to  an   international  ecclesiastical monarchy,  the   Papacy.  The  government  of   the   Catholic  world was  definitely  centralized  at   Rome.  The  Church  had  lost  in wealth  and   official  authority,  but   she   gained   in   force   of   centralization. Meanwhile  new  orders  were  being   established,  and   new convents,  particularly  of   women  ; these,   by   means  of   legacies   and gifts,   began   once  more  to   build  up   ecclesiastical  estates.

In   Rome  the   Pope   was  struggling  against  his   spiritual  and temporal  adversaries.  Pius  VII.  condemned  the   Bible  Societies which  were  spreading  translations  of   the   Bible.  Leo   XII.  (182329)   prosecuted  particularly  the   secret  societies:  the   Carbonari, who  were  labouring  to   establish  Italian  unity,   and   consequently to   destroy   the   temporal  power  of   the   Pope;   also   the   Free   Masons, who  attacked  unity   of   the   faith  by   demanding  religious  liberty. Then  began  that  bitter  contest  between  the   Holy   See   and  the Free  Masons,  which  was  to   fill   the  nineteenth  century  with polemics.

The  Liberal  Catholic  Party. - The  constant  tendency  of   the Catholic  clergy   had   been  to   rest  on  authority  in   order  to   make the   true  religion  obligatory  and  maintain  unity   of   faith;   the Pope's  doctrine,  formulated  in   his  declarations,  condemned liberty   of   religion   and   of   the   press.   But   Catholics  were  drawn into   the   movement  toward  liberalism  which  brought  reforms  and revolutions  to   England,  Switzerland,  France,  and  Belgium. About  1828  a  new  Liberal  Catholic  party  appeared  which  tried to   reconcile  the   new   liberal  doctrines  with  the   traditional  power of   the   Church.  Instead  of   asking   privileges  for   the   clergy   and government  assistance  against  the  opponents  of   their  religion, they   confined  themselves  to   demanding  for   the  Church  that liberty  of   common  law  which  the   liberal  system  accorded  to simple  individuals,  the   right   of   association,  the   right   to   acquire property,  to   found  educational  and  charitable  institutions.  The Church,  in   possession  of   the   truth,  had  no  need  of   coercive power;  liberty   would  be   sufficient  to   enable  her   to   undertake  the direction  of   society,   through  education,  preaching,  and   the   manifestation of   her   virtues  and   moral  superiority.

The  movement  began  in   three  countries,  Ireland,  Belgium, and  France,  whose  governments,  either  Protestant  or   Gallican, allowed  the   Catholic  clergy   less   liberty   of   action  than   the   liberal

doctrine  allowed  to   private   associations,  and   where  simple   liberty for   the   Church  represented  an   increase  of   power.  The  Liberal Catholics  conducted  the  campaign  simultaneously  in   the   three countries;  their  leaders  were  in   personal  communication.

In   Ireland,  O'Connell,  in   the   name  of   liberty,   demanded  and obtained  (1829)   the   repeal   of   the   Test   Act   and   the   admission  of Catholics  to   civil   equality.  In   Belgium  the   Liberal  Catholics,  in the   name  of   liberty,   aided  in   the   revolt  against   Holland  and secured  the   Constitution  of   1831.   This  granted  to   the   clergy complete  liberty   as   in   America,  and   at   the   same  time  preserved to   them  their   privileges  as   in   Europe.  In   France  the   party   was merely  a   group  of   young  men.  Their  leader,  Abbe  Lamennais, had  protested  against  the   expulsion  of   the   Jesuits   (1829):   "We demand  for  the  Catholic  Church  the  liberty  promised  by   the Charter  to   all   religions,  the^   liberty   which  is   extended  to   Protestants and   Jews.   .   .   We   want   liberty   of   conscience,  of   the   press, and   of   education,  and   that   is   what   the   Belgians,  too,   are   demanding." Lacordaire  demanded  American  liberty.  The  party  was small  and   had   no   influence  with  the   government,  but   it   excited public   opinion   through  its   organ,  the   Avenir,  founded  in   August, 1830,   and   by   the   declarations  of   Montalembert,  peer  of   France. He  demanded  liberty  of   education,  that  is,   the   right   to   establish Catholic  schools.  Later  they   went  on  to   reject   the   concordat, which  gave   the   choice  of   bishops  to   the   enemies  of   Catholicism, and   to   demand  the   separation  of   Church  and   state.

The  Liberal  Catholics,  in   accepting  liberty,   did   not  give   up   the direction  of   morals,  education,  and  charities  ; but   they   declared that   these  things,   not   being   within  the   domain  of   the   state,   must be   cared  for   by   the   individual  citizen,  who   had   the   right   to   hand over  the   control  of   them  to   the   clergy.  In   the   Church  they recognised  the   supreme  and  absolute  power  of   the   Pope;   they were  Ultramontanes,  opposed  to   the   National  Churches,  although the   ill-informed  French  public   often  made  Liberal  the   synonym for   Gallican  and   the   opposite  of   Ultramontane.  But   the   doctrine of   liberty,   as  opposed   to   unity   of   the   faith,   was  never  accepted   by the  court  of   Rome.  Gregory  XVI.  (1830-46)  condemned  the Belgian  constitution  as   Pius  VII.  had  condemned  the   French Charte,  because  it   recognised  liberty   of   religion   and   of   the   press ; he   condemned  the   Liberal  Catholics  of   France  in   the   encyclical Mirari  Vos   (August,  1832).*

*   Among  the  "   causes  of   the   evils  that  afflict  the   Church  "   it   specified indtfferentism,  or   that  perverse  idea  spread   about  through  the   dishonesty

In   spite   of   the   condemnation,  the   Liberal  party   took   charge   of the   Catholic  movement  in   the   constitutional  states,  and   continued to   demand  the   liberties  necessary  to   the   Church.*  The  establishment of   the   constitutional  monarchy  in   Portugal  and   in   Spain destroyed  practical  unity   of   faith  in   those  states  and   introduced actual  toleration,  secularized  almost  all   the   Church  estates,  and suppressed  almost  all   the   monasteries.

The  Liberal  movement  appeared  later  in   Italy,   with  the risorgimento;  it   took  mainly  the   form  of   clet  '{co-liberal  societies, formed  by   priests   to   establish  at   once   liberty   and   national  unity. One  of   the   writers  of   the   risorgimento,  Gioberti,  was  a  priest. Pius  IX.,   elected  against  the   candidate  of   the   Austrian  party, passed   for   the   Pope   of   the   Liberal  party,   and   his   election  at   first seemed  the   definite  triumph  of   the   Liberal  Catholics  (1846).

The  Catholic  Democracy  and  the  Revolution  of   1848. - The Catholics  began   to   feel   the   effects  of   a   new  political   movement, the   movement  toward  democracy,  which  ended  in   the   revolutions of   1848.  As   before  1830   a   Liberal  Catholic  party   had  been formed  in   all   the   states,  so   before  1848   a   democratic  Catholic of   wicked  men  that  eternal  salvation  of   the   soul   may   be   secured  by   a   profession of   any  sort  of   faith,   provided  that  one  conforms  in   morals  to   the prevalent  ideas  of   justice   and  decency.  .   .   From  the   fetid  sources  of   this indifferentism  flows  that  ridiculous  and  erroneous  idea,  or  rather  that madness,  that  we  must  procure  and  guarantee  for  everybody  liberty  of conscience,  an  error  .   .   .   for   which  the   way   is   smoothed  by   that  complete and   immoderate  freedom  of   opinion  .  .  .   out  of   which  some,   in   an excess  of   imprudence,  pretend  that  some  good   may  come  to   religion.  .   . With  this  is   connected  that  liberty   of   the   press,   the   worst  of   all,   which  can never  be   sufficiently  execrated  and  cursed.  .   .   There  are,   however,  men carried  away   by   imprudence  to   the   point   of   maintaining  obstinately  that the  deluge  of   errors  which  arises  from  it   is   sufficiently  compensated  by some  book  that  is   published  .   .   .   for   the   defence  of   religion   and   truth.  .   . Is   it   possible  that   a   man  of   sense  could  say   that  .   .   .   poisons   should  be put   on  public   sale,   because  there  are  remedies  which  may  snatch  from death?  "   The  Encyclical  recalls  the  services  rendered  by   the   Index  and condemns  the  doctrine  of   those  who  not  only   reject   censorship  of   books .   .   .   but   go   so   far   as   to   declare  that   it   is   contrary  to   the   principles  of justice  and  dare  to   refuse  to  the  Church  the  right   to  establish  and enforce  it."  Then,  recalling  the  disastrous  revolutions  produced  by heretics,  it   adds:  "We  cannot  expect  happier  results  for   religion  and   the lay   power   from  the   desires  of   those  who  wish  to   separate  Church  and state  and  break  the  union  of   priesthood  and  empire,  for   it   is   an  established fact   that   lovers  of   unbridled  liberty   dread  this   union,   which  has always  been  salutary  both  for   Church  and  state."

*   See   for   Ireland  p.   54,   for   Belgium  p.   245,   for   France  p.   49.

## CATHOLIC  DEMOCRACY  AND  REVOLUTION  OF  1848.     695

party  was  formed  in   the   democratic  countries.  It   began   where the   democratic  revolution  had  been  first  made,  in   the   Catholic cantons  of   Switzerland.  It   was  an   Ultramontane  party,  attached to   the   sovereignty  of   the   Pope;   at   Freiburg  it   enlisted  the   Jesuits; at   Lucerne,  when  it   had   obtained  possession  of   the   government, it   submitted  the   new  constitution  of   the   canton  for   the   approval of   Gregory  XVI.  It   was  a   party  of   unity   of   the   faith,   hostile  to the   doctrine  of   religious  liberty.  But,   while  preserving  the   old doctrines,  it   adopted  new  lines  of   action  which  practically changed  the  relations  of   the   clergy   with  the   political  body,   in countries  where  Catholicism  is   not  the  state  religion.  The Church,  without  theoretically  condemning  any   form  of   government, had   hardly   ever  actually   allied   itself   except   with   princes   and aristocracies.  Its   own  organization  is   a.   monarchical  hierarchy, in   which  all   authority  comes  from  above,  by   virtue  of   a   mystical right,   and   is   exercised  without  control  over  a.   body   of   subjects. In   the   democratic  republics  of   Switzerland,  based  on   the   sovereignty of   the  people  and  government  by   elective  officers,  the authority  was,  on  the   contrary,  delegated  from  below.  Between these  two  opposing  systems  the   Catholic  party   found  a   practical reconciliation.  The  representatives  of   the  sovereign  people, masters  by   election  of   the   sovereign  lay   power,  subjected  themselves voluntarily,  as   Catholics,  to   the   sovereign  spiritual   power of   the   Pope   and   left   him   judge   of   the   limits  between  the   two powers.  In   this  system  of   revolutionary  origin,   the   Church  recovered indirectly   a   higher   authority  than   in   the   monarchies  ; for the   Pope,   instead  of   having   to   treat  with   an   hereditary  sovereign, accustomed  to  command,  found  only   submissive  sons  of   the Church,  accustomed  to  obey.  He  became  once  more  the   supreme arbiter   in   settling   the   relations  between  Church  and   state. But  to   make  good   this   new  power,  the   old   means  of   ecclesiastical influence  were  no   longer   sufficient.  Democratic  processes must  be   adopted:  electoral  and   parliamentary  organization,  and the   press;  parliamentary  Catholic  parties   were  organized,  Catholic committees  and   Catholic  newspapers  were  established.  Then began  also  new  difficulties.  The  majority  of   Catholic  members and  journalists  were  laymen.  This  was  a  new  power  in   the direction  of   Catholic  interests;  between  them  and   the   official heads  of   the   Church,  bishops  and   priests,   rivalries  in   influence and   divergencies  in   opinion   led   to   conflicts  of   a   new  sort.   The Pope,   called  upon   to   end   them  by   his   sovereign  authority,  was

to   be   led   to   interfere  more  and   more  in   the   current  politics   of Catholic  countries  and  to   take  the   part   of   a   leader  of   a   political party.

This  democratic  evolution  was  suddenly  accelerated  by   the revolutions  of   1848.   These  were  lay   and   democratic  revolutions, made  in   the   name  of   the   lay   sovereignty  of   the   people   and   absolute liberty,   usually   with   a   sentiment  of   good-will  for   the   clergy. They   did   not   destroy   the   institutions  of   the   Church,  but   they   proclaimed the   principle  of   the   complete  liberty   of   creed  and   tended to   laicize  public   institutions.  In   France,  where  the   state  was already  completely  lay,   the   official  organization  of   the   Church remained  the  same,  but  universal  suffrage  gave  the  clergy  a political  influence  which  became  the   most  active  force  of   the Conservative  party.  In   Italy   the   governments  were  content  to set   up   the   principle   of   religious   liberty,   and   Catholicism  remained the   privileged  state  religion.  In   the   German  countries  the   revolution introduced  the   Belgian   system  of   Church  liberty.  The Frankfort  Parliament  adopted  an  article  which  passed   finally   into the   Constitution  of   Prussia:  "   Every   religious  society   regulates and  administers  its   affairs  in   an   independent  manner,  but  remains .   .   .   subject   to   the   laws   of   the   state."  The   German bishops  met  at   Wurzburg  in   October,  1848,   and   demanded  the abolition  of   the   subjection  imposed  on  the   Church  (placet,   prohibition of   correspondence  with  the   Holy   See,   appeal   to   the   courts against  clerical  decrees).  The  revolution  in   Prussia  and   Austria resulted  in   abolishing  the   placet   and   state  supervision.  In   the other  German  states  the   regulations  were  made  only   slowly,   in the   midst  of   complicated  conflicts.

Reaction  in   the   Church. - The  Revolution  of   1848   made  a   deep impression  on   Pius  IX. ; he   consented  to   liberty   granted  under  a paternal  government,  but   his   subjects  wanted  to   impose  on   him a   constitutional  liberty   and   to   limit   his   power   legally.  He   broke with  the   Liberal  party.  Driven  from  Rome  by   the   revolutionists, he   returned  a  partisan  of   the   absolutist  system,  determined to   fight   the   revolution  with   the   aid   of   the   governments,  and   convinced that   the   temporal   power  of   the   Pope   was  the   necessary barrier  against  revolution.*

*   The  Encyclical  Nostz's  et   Nobiscum  to   the   bishops  of   Italy   (December 8,   1849),   after  condemning  socialism  and  communism,  declares  that  "   the successor  of   Peter,  the  Roman  Pontiff,  possesses  supreme  authority (przmatum)  over  the  whole  world;  he   is   the   true  vicar  of   Christ,  head  of the   whole  Church,  father  and  teacher  of   all   Christians.  The  easiest  way

Ir In   all   the   states,  the   revolution  was   followed  by   a   reaction;  the lay   governments,  as  after  the   Restoration,  made  alliance  with  the Church  authorities  and  by   a  more  methodical  alliance  than  in 1814.  The  socialist  movement  of   1848   had   alarmed  the   middle classes  and   decided  them  to   appeal   to   the   Conservative  power  of the   clergy.*  Irreligion,  which  had  gone  out  of   fashion  among the   nobility  after   the   Revolution  of   1793,  went  out  of   fashion  in the   middle  classes  after  the   Revolution  of   1848;   in   all   the   Catholic countries  f   religion  became,  and  has  remained,  a  worldly obligation,  a  part   of   good   education  and  the   fashion  of   good society.  The  Catholic  party  used  these  conditions  to   increase the   power  of   the   clergy.  In   France  it   secured  the   liberty   of secondary  education  and   Catholic  primary  schools  (1850).  Later, under  Napoleon  III.,   it   gained   the   favour  of   the   government.  In Prussia  the   state  resigned  to   the   bishops   the   control  of   their   clergy and  their  colleges  (see   p.   491).   In   the   small  German  states a   series  of   long   and   complicated  negotiations  succeeded  in   establishing a  similar  system.  In   Austria  the   Holy   See   secured  the abandonment  of   Josephism  in   1850,   then  the   Concordat  of   1855, the   first   in   which  the   government  of   a   great   state  recognised  that the   Church  held   its   rights,   not  as  a   concession  from   the   lay   power, but   "   by   divine  institution  and   canon  law."  State  criminal  juris- to   keep   the   nations  in   the   profession  of   the   Catholic  faith  is   to   keep   them in   the   communion  and  in   obedience  to   the   Pope.  The  modern  enemies  of God  and  of   human  society  also  do   their  utmost  to   draw  away   the   Italian peoples  from  obedience  to   us."  As   for   the   princes,  "they  see  that  the diminution  of   the   authority  of   the   bishops  and   the   increasing  contempt  for divine  and  Church  precepts  that  are  violated  with  impunity  have  equally diminished  the   obedience  of   the   people   to   lay   authority  and   opened  to   the enemies  of   public   peace  an  easier  means  of   inciting  sedition  against  the prince.  They  also  see  that  by   seizing,  confiscating,  and   publicly  selling temporal  property  lawfully  belonging  to   the   Church,  respect  for   property consecrated  to   a   religious  purpose  has  been  weakened  among  the   people, who  are  thus  disposed  to   listen  more  readily   to   the   partisan  of   socialism and  communism,  threatening  to   seize  and  divide  or  make  common  other

forms  of   property." *   Louis  Veuillot,  director  of   the   Catholic  paper   the   Univers,  thus   formulated the   policy   of   Thiers,   head   of   the   Orleanist-Catholic  coalition:  "   He would  like  to-day   to   fortify   the   party   of   smug  and   thorough-going  revolutionists, of   which  he   is   the   leader,  by   a   body   of   gendarmes  in   cassocks,  on account  of   the   manifest  insufficiency  of   the   others." \ A   similar  evolution  has  taken  place   in   the   Protestant  countries,  especially in   England.  In   the   Orthodox  countries  of   eastern  Europe,  religious indifference  has  remained  the   fashion  in   cultivated  society.

## 698  THE   CHURCH  AND    THE   CATHOLIC  PARTIES.

diction  over  the   clergy   was  represented  simply   as  a  concession from  the   Pope   "   out  of   consideration  for   the   conditions  of   the time."  A   similar  concordat  had  been  concluded  in   Spain  in 1851.  Meanwhile  the  Pope  secured  the   right   to   institute  officially bishoprics  and   ecclesiastical  districts  in   the   Protestant countries - in   England  in   1850,   and   in   Holland  in   1853.   Throughout Europe   the   period   of   reaction  from   1849   *°   J^59   was  used   to increase  the   power  of   the   Catholic  parties   in   almost  all   the   countries. The   Kingdom  of   Sardinia  alone  has,   since  1850,   undertaken to   laicize  her   institutions  and   enter  into   open  conflict  with the   Holy   See   (see   p.   348).

In   addition  to   these  partial   restorations,  Pius  IX.   laboured  to effect  a   general   restoration  of   Catholic  society,   according  to   the plan   indicated  in   his   official  acts  and   commented  on   by   his   official organ,  the   Civilta  Catolica  (Catholic  Civilization),  founded  in   1850. He  began  with  an  act  of   doctrinal  sovereignty  proclaiming  the Immaculate  Conception  of   the   Virgin,  the   favourite  doctrine  of the   Franciscans  and  Jesuits,  but  rejected  by   the   Dominicans. After  asking   the   advice  of   the   bishops   and   receiving  576   answers, almost  all   affirmative,  he   solemnly  promulgated  the   dogma  in the   Sistine  chapel   on  the   8th   of   December - a   day   chosen  for a   mystical  reason  and  ever  afterward  consecrated  to   the   great acts  of   his   pontificate.  He   promulgated  it   without  a   meeting  of the   council  by   virtue  of   his   pontifical  authority,  thus  affirming the   right   of   the   Pope   to   define,   by   his   own  act,   the   faith   of   the Catholic  Church  (1854).

He   then  called  together  a   congregation  to   prepare  a   complete exposition  of   his   doctrine  on   the   role   of   the   Church  in   modern society   and   to   draw  up   the   catalogue  of   contemporary  errors;  it worked  five  years,  and   made  the   plan   which  served  as   the   doctrinal manifesto  of   1864.

While  Pius  IX.  was  preparing  his   doctrinal  exposition,  the Sardinian  government  established  the   Kingdom  of   Italy,   deprived the   Pope   of   a   part   of   his   states,  and   announced  its   intention  of making  Rome  the   capital   of   the   new   kingdom.  Pius  IX.   treated the   annexation  of   the   States  of   the   Church  as  a   robbery.  The destruction  of   the   temporal  power,  even  though   accomplished  by a   monarchy,  was  to   him   a   most  shocking  case  of   Revolution.  He thought  himself  back  in   1848,   all   the   more  so   because  the   Italian monarchical  government  worked  in   harmony  with  the   revolutionists of   1848,   with  Garibaldi,  one  of   the   triumvirs  of   the Roman  Republic.  Pius  IX.  therefore  condemned  the   new   Revo-

## ENCYCLICAL  "QUANTA  CURA  "•   AND  THE  SYLLABUS.     699

lution   and   excommunicated  all   those  who  had   "   taken  part   in   the criminal  invasion  of   his   provinces.*

The  Encyclical  "Quanta  Cura"  and  the  Syllabus  (1864).When  France,  by   the   September  Convention,  consented  to   withdraw the   troops   which  defended  the   Pope   at   Rome,  Pius  IX., indignant,  decided  to   publish  his   plan   for   the   reconstruction  of society,  December  8,   1864.  He   gave   it   the   form  of   an  encyclical to   Christendom,  followed  by   a   "   catalogue  (syllabus)  of   modern errors  "   which  he   had   previously  condemned.

The  Quanta  Cura  set   forth  in   definite  form  the   fundamental conception  of   the   Pope,   already   explained  in   the   Civilta  Catolica: Catholic  civilization,  so  prosperous  during   the   Middle  Ages,   had been  successively  enfeebled  by   Lutheranism,  Jansenism,  Voltairanism,  and   socialism;  society   has   been  organized  in   a   heterodox spirit,   it   must   be   reconstructed  from  the   bottom  on   legitimate authority.

The  Encyclical  began   by   recalling  the   fact   that   the   office  of   the Pope   is   to   preserve  the   faithful  from  heresies  and   errors.  Pius IX.   had   already   condemned  "   the   principal  errors  of   our  most  unhappy epoch   "   (tristissimce  nostros  cetatis),   and   "   the   monstrous opinions  which  predominate  everywhere  in   our  time  .  .   .   and from  which  almost  all   the   other  errors  have  their  origin."

The  fundamental  error  is   "   naturalism  "   (naturalismus),  the idea  "   that   the   best   organization  of   government  and   civil   progress demand  absolutely  that   human  society  shall  be   constituted and   governed  without  taking   any  more  account  of   religion  than  if it   did   not   exist,   or   at   least   without  making   a   distinction  between

*   The   apostolical  letter  of   March  26,   1860,   expounds  the   doctrine  of   the temporal  power.  "   The  Catholic  Church,  founded  by   Christ,  .  .  .   has secured  by   virtue  of   her   divine  institution  the   form  of   a   perfect  society; she   should,  therefore,  enjoy   so   full   liberty   that   in   the   exercise  of   her   sacred ministry  she  should  never  be   subjected  to   any   lay   power.  It   is   therefore by   a   special   decree  of   Providence,  that  the   Pope,   established  by   Christ  as the   head  and   centre  of   his   whole  Church,  has   acquired  the   temporal  power. The  divine  wisdom  has  willed  that  in   such  a   crowd  of   temporal  princes the   Sovereign  Pontiff  shall  enjoy   that  political  authority  which  is   necessary to   the   exercise  of   his   spiritual   power,  authority,  and   jurisdiction.  It was  agreed  that  the  Catholic  world  should  have  no  occasion  to   suspect that  this  See  can  be,   as   head  of   the   Church  universal,  influenced  by   the temporal  powers  or   drawn  away   by   parties."  A   letter  of   1863   condemns churchmen  who  "  attack  the   temporal  power  of   the   Holy   See   "   and   "   dare to   establish  wholly   objectionable  societies  called  Clerical  Liberals,  Mutual Aid,   Deliverer  of   the   Italian  Clergy,  (clerico-liberali,  Dimutuo  soccorso, Emancipatrice  del   clero  italiano)"

the   true  religion  and  false  religions;  further,  "that  the   best system  is   that   in   which  the   government  is   not  empowered  to   visit punishment  on  violators  of   the   Catholic  religion  except  so   far   as the   public   may  require."  (The   idea  that   the   government  must be   founded  on  natural  motives  and   remain  a   stranger  to   religion is   really   historically  the   foundation  of   the   English   constitutional system  and  of   the   modern  lay   state;   it   has   resulted  in   withdrawing from   the   clergy   every  means  of   material  constraint,  leaving them  only   a   moral  authority.  It   is   contrary  to   the   unity   of   faith, the   fundamental  doctrine  of   the   Church.  It   implies  the   mental reservation  that  the   different  religions  *   are  of   sufficiently  equal value  to   make  it   possible  to   leave  each  man  to   choose  one   for himself.)

"   From  this   absolutely  false\_idea  of   society   and   government  " arises  the   error,   "   set   down  as  madness  by   Gregory  XVI.,"  that "   liberty   of   conscience  and   of   creed  is   the   right   of   every  man, and  may   be   proclaimed  and   admitted  into  every  well-constituted society,  and   that   citizens  are  entitled  to   full   liberty   of   publishing and  maintaining  their  opinions  through  the   press  or  otherwise without  restraint  from  any  civil  or  ecclesiastical  authority." Now,  this  is   "   a   fatal  liberty,   for   if   free   discussion  of   human opinion  is   always   allowed,  there  will   always   be   people   who   dare to   resist  the   truth."  (Liberty  of   conscience  and   of   the   press   is   in fact   irreconcilable  with  unity   of   faith;   historically  it   was   first established  in   countries  torn  by   religious  revolutions.)

When  "   religion  has   been  discarded  from  civil   society  .   .   .   the idea  of   justice   and   law"  is   lost;   the   immediate  consequence  is that   "   the   will   of   the   people,   as  manifested  by   public   opinion   or any  other  means,  constitutes  the   supreme  law   independently  of every   divine  and   human  right,   and   that   in   political   order  accomplished facts   .   .   .   have  the   force  of   law."  It   is   thus   that   the   religious orders   were  abolished.  After  religion   had   been  driven out  of   society,   it   was   to   be   excluded  from   the   family,   by   civil   marriage and   lay   schools.  (It   is   a   fact   that   the   sovereignty  of   the people  has   not   been  historically  admitted  except   in   those  countries which   no   longer   recognise  the   sovereignty  of   the   Church; it   has   led   to   civil   marriage   and   neutrality  of   the   public   school.)

*   The   errors  of   indifferenttsm  and   latitudinarianism  are  mentioned  in   the Syllabus  in   these  terms:  "   Man  may   in   the   creed  of   any  religion  find   the road  to   eternal  salvation  and   secure  eternal  salvation.  Every  man  is   free to   embrace  and  to   profess  the   religion  which  he   believes  to   be   true,  conducted by   the   light   of   reason."

In   political  matters  it   is   an   "   error  to   say   that   the   supreme authority  intrusted  by   Christ  to   the   Church  and   the   Holy   See   is subject  to   civil   authority,  and   to   deny   all   the   rights   of   the   Church and   the   Holy   See   in   those  things   which  belong   to   the   outside world,"  by   declaring  that   "   the   Papal   Acts  and   decrees  relative to   religion  and   the   Church  must  have  ttie   consent  of   the   civil power,  and   that   the   Church  has   not  the   right   to   visit   those  who violate  its   laws   with   temporal  punishments.*  This  regime   rests on   " the   heretical  principle  "   that   "   the   ecclesiastical  power   is   not, by   divine  law,   distinct  and   independent  of   the   civil   power."  (This is   in   fact   the   principle   of   the   Protestant  states  and   of   Casaropapism.  The  "   Catholic  dogma   "   is,   on  the   contrary,  that   "   the full   power  was   divinely   conferred  by   Christ  on   the   Pope,   to   tend, rule,   and   govern  the   universal  Church."  It   follows  from  it   that "   the   Church  must  form  an   independent  society."

Thus  to   the   lay   state   founded  on  religious  liberty   and   the   supremacy of   the   civil   power,  the   Encyclical  opposes  the   ideal  of the   Catholic  state  founded  on  the   complete  independence  of   the ecclesiastical  power  and   compulsory  unity   of   faith.

The  Syllabus,  (catalogue)  "   of   the   principal  errors  of   our  times, set   forth   in   consistorial  addresses,  encyclicals,  and   other  apostolical letters   of   Pope   Pius   IX.,"   reproduced  in   a   summary  form  all the   doctrines  condemned  by   him.  They   are  numbered,  from  I to   80,   and   grouped  in   logical   order,   beginning  with  errors  of theory  under  the   following  titles:  I.   Pantheism,  naturalism,  and absolute  rationalism.  II.   Moderate  rationalism.  These  are  philosophic opinions.  III.   Indifferentism,  latitudinarianism.  This is   the   theory   of   liberty   of   conscience  (see   p.   693).  IV.   Socialism, communism,  Bible  societies,  Clerico-Liberals.  V.   Errors  concerning the   Church  and   its   rights.   These  are  the   theory   of   clerical  subordination to   the   lay   power,f   and   the   practice   of   toleration.  VI.

*   The   end   of   the   Encyclical  recommends  the   bishops  to   teach  laymen that  "royal  power   is   not  conferred  simply   for   the   government  of   the   world, but  especially  for   the  protection  of   the   Church,"  and  orders  prayers  for God's  aid   "   in   so   great   calamities  of   the   Church  and   civil   society,   in   such   a conspiracy  of   enemies,  and  in   so  great   a   mass  of   errors  against  Catholic society  and  the   Holy   See."

t  "   19.   The   Church  is   not   a   true  and   completely  free   society,   it   does   not enjoy   its   proper  and   constant  rights,   conferred  by   its   divine  founder,  but it   belongs  to   the   civil  power  to   define  the   rights   of   the   Church  and   the extent  of   those  rights.  20.   Ecclesiastical  power  may  not  exercise  its authority  without  the   permission  of   the   civil  government.  24.   The   Church has   not  the   right   to   employ   force;   it   has   no   temporal  power,  either  direct

Errors  concerning  civil  society   considered  either  by   itself  or   in   its relations  with  the   Church.  These  are  the   theory   of   the   state's right   to   interfere  in   ecclesiastical  affairs  (exequatur,  recursus  ab abusu,  seminaries,  religious  vows,  congregations)  *   and  the theory  of   lay   education.f  VII.  Errors  concerning  natural  and Christian  morality.  These  are  the  theory  of   lay   morality,  the value  of   the   accomplished  fact,   the   principle  of   non-intervention. VIII.  Errors  concerning  Christian  marriage.  These  are  civil marriage  J and   divorce.  IX.   Errors  concerning  the   temporal  power of   the   Pope.   These  relate  to  the   destruction  of   the   temporal power.  X.  Errors  which  relate  to   modern  liberalism.

The  Syllabus  thus  condemns  not  only   the   enemies  of   the Church  who  wish  to   destroy  it,   but   also  the   indifferent  people who  wish  to   take  away   its   official  privileges  by   reducing  it   to   the condition  of   a   private   association,  and   the   supporters  of   religious liberty   and   neutrality  between  sects,  who  demand  lay   citizenship, lay   marriage,  and  lay   schools.  It   also  condemns  the or   indirect.  26.   The  Church  has   no  native  and  legitimate  right   to   acquire and  possess.  30.   The  immunity  of   the   Church  and   of   ecclesiastical  persons arises  from  civil  law.  31.   Ecclesiastical  justice  for   the  trial  of   civil  or criminal  cases  against  the   clergy   must  be   absolutely  abolished,  even  without consulting  the   Holy   See.  32.   The   personal  immunity  which  exempts the  clergy  from  military  service  may   be   repealed  without  violation  of natural  rights   and  equity."

*   "   42.   In   case  of   conflict  of   laws   between  the   two   powers,  civil   law   prevails. 49.   Civil  authority  may  prevent  communication  of   the   bishops  with the  Pope   or  with  each  other.  50.   Lay   authority  has   in   itself  the   right   to present  bishops  and  may  require  them  to  assume  the  administration  of dioceses  without  receiving  canonical  institution  from  the  Holy   See.  52. The  government  may  change  the  age  prescribed  by   the  Church  for   religious profession  .   .   .   and   order  religious  communities  to   allow  no  person to   pronounce  their  solemn  vows  without  its   permission.  53.   The  civil government  may  grant  its   aid   to   all   who  wish  to   give   up   the   religious  life and  break  their  vows.  55.   Church  and  state  must  be   separate  from  each other." f "   47.   The   best   form  of   civil   society   demands  that  the   public   schools, open  to  all   children,  and  in   general  public  institutions  .  .  .   for   higher education  .  .  .   shall  be   free  from  all   Church  authority  .  .   .   and   subject to   the   direction  of   civil   and   political  authority."

$ "   66.   The   marriage  sacrament  is   only   an  accessory  to   the   contract,  and may   be   separated  from  it.  67.   By   natural  law  the  marriage  tie   is   not   indissoluble, and   in   various  cases   divorce  properly  so  called  may   be   sanctioned by   civil   authority.  68.   The  Church  has   not  the   power  of   preventing improper  marriages;  this  power  belongs  to  the  civil  authority.  74.   The trial  of   cases  relating  to   marriage  and   betrothal  belongs,  properly,  to   civil justice."

conditional  allies   of   the   Church  who  struggled  with  her   against the   revolution,  and   the   monarchical  governments,  advocates  of lay   sovereignty  who   have  abolished  Church  courts  and  obligatory vows,  and   keep   the   clergy   in   subjection  by   means  of exequatur,  recur sus  ab   abusu,  and  the   requirement  of   previous authorization.  To   these  may   be   added  the   Gallicans,  the   oppo-' nents  of   temporal  power,  and   even  the   Liberal  Catholics,  who   admit religious   liberty.*  In   order  to   mark  more  distinctly  the   opposition between   the   ideal   Catholic  society   and   modern  society, the   close   of   the   Syllabus   condemns  this   proposition  :   "   The   Pope can   be   and   ought   to   be   reconciled  and   keep   pace   with   progress, liberalism,  and   modern  civilization."

The  Syllabus,  owing   to   its   abbreviated  and   negative  form,   is difficult  of   interpretation;  it   is   not  enough   to   turn  each  of   the propositions  as   formulated  into   the   opposite  sense  to   find   the   true meaning  of   the   author.  There  is   the   further  fact   that  it   is   a theological  document,  in   which  distinction  must  be   made  between thesis   and   hypothesis;   a   proposition  condemned  in   principle may   be   tolerated  in   practice  under  given   conditions.  Two  opposite interpretations  f of   it   were  published,  both  approved  by   the Pope.  Compared  with  the  Encyclical,  the  Syllabus  at   least shows  that  the   Pope,   even  if   he   did   not  condemn  the   contemporary lay   state,   had   an  altogether  different  ideal,   and   preferred  the system  of   the   Middle  Ages.  If   the   Syllabus  was  received  with joy   by   the   enemies  of   the   Church,  who   represented  it   as  a   declaration of   war  by   the   Pope   upon  modern  society,  it   was  received with  vexation  by   the   governments,  which  tried  to   prevent  its publication,  and  with  obvious  embarrassment  by   the   Liberal Catholics.

*   "   77.   In   our   time   it   is   no   longer   desirable  to   retain  the   Catholic  religion as   the   only   state  religion,   to   the   exclusion  of   all   other   beliefs.  78.   It   is   also well  that  in   certain  Catholic  countries  legal   provision  has  been  made whereby  foreigners  going  there  may  enjoy  public  exercise  of   their  re- ligions." f In   France,  Dupanloup,  Bishop  of   Orleans,  one  of   the   leaders  of   the Liberal  Catholic  party,  represented  the   Syllabus  as  a   reply   to   the   September Convention  meant  simply   to   condemn  revolution  and   the   abuse  of   modern liberty   ("   The  Encyclical  and  the  September  Convention,"  1864).  His interpretation  won  the  support  of   630   bishops.  (See   a   similar  explanation in   A.   Bossebosuf,  "   The  Syllabus  without  Prejudice,"  1885.)  Schrader,  an Austrian  Jew,   a   member  of   the  congregation  charged  with  the   drafting of   the   Syllabus,  took   the   texts,   however,  in   their   literal  sense  as   a   condemnation of   modern  society,  "   Der  Papst   und  die   modernen  Ideen,"  1865. ern

## 704  THE   CHURCH  AND    THE   CATHOLIC  PARTIES.

The  Vatican  Council  (1869-70). - In   order  to   perfect  the   doctrinal reconstruction  of   Catholic  society,   Pius   IX.   decided  to   have a   solemn  recognition  of   the   absolute  monarchical  power  of   the Pope   in   the   Church,  even  in   matters  of   doctrine,  under  the   form of   the   dogma   of   Papal   infallibility.  In   1867   he   charged   a   congregation of   six   cardinals  with  the   preparation  of   a  project   of decrees.  Then  in   June,   1868,   he   summoned  to   the   Vatican  an Ecumenical  Council,  the   first  in   three  centuries.

The  Council,  which  met  December  8,   1869,   was  an  exclusively ecclesiastical  assembly  of   about  780   members.*  No   civil  government was   represented  there.  The   Pope   had   made  sovereign regulations  for   the   procedure  of   the   council  ; the   plans   were   drawn up   by   the   committees  he   had   chosen;  nothing  could  come  under consideration  without  his   authorization,  and   the   Pope   alone  possessed the   right   of   initiative.  The   first   discussion  was   in   general congregation,  under  the   presidency  of   a  cardinal  (chosen  by   the Pope),  who  controlled  the  right   of   speech.  Any   proposition which  was  not  adopted  unanimously,  passed  into  the   hands  of   a deputation  of   24   members  elected  by   secret  ballot,   who   discussed it   and   presented  a   printed   report.  Thence  it   returned  to   the   general congregation,  where  each   member  voted  orally:   Placet,   Yes; Non  placet,   No;   Placet  juxta   modum,  Yes   with   amendments.  The speaking  was  in   Latin;  the   sessions  were  secret,  and  all   those who  took  part   in   them  were  bound  to   secrecy.  The  public   sessions were  simply   ceremonies  of   publication.  The   Pope   had   at command  an  assured  majority,  principally  made  up   of   the   224 Italians,  the   42   Orientals,  and   the   119   bishops   in   partibus.

Opposition  had  begun  before  the   meeting  of   the   Council,  in certain  publications ; f   in   the   Council  it   was   first   shown  in   the protest  of   Strossmayer,  a   Croatian  bishop,  in   December,  1869, against  the   regulation  imposed  on  the  assembly  by   the   Pope;

*In   the   order  of   ranks:  48   cardinals,  10  patriarchs,  4   primates,  137   archbishops, 527   bishops,  16   mitred  abbots,  35   generals,  or  vicars-general,  of orders.  By   nations:  224   Italians,  81   Frenchmen,  40   Spaniards,  43   Austrians,  16   Germans,  27   English,  19   Irish,   40   Americans  from  the   United States,  9   Canadians,  30   Latin-Americans,  19   Europeans  from  the  small states,  42   Orientals,  119   bishops  in   partibus,  etc.

fin   Germany,  Dollinger,  professor  of   theology  at   Munich,  the  most celebrated  Catholic  theologian  in   Germany,  published  a   number  of   articles in   the   Augsburg  Gazette  in   March,  1869,   which  he   gathered  into  a   book under  an  assumed  name  :   Janus,   "   The  Pope   and  the   Council."  In   France, Mgr.   Maret,  professor  in   the   Theological  Faculty  of   Paris  published  "   The Council  and  Religious  Interests,"  in   September,  1869.

then   in   a   petition   of   the   German  and   Austrian  bishops   of   the same  character,  in   January,  1870.  The  opposition  was  of   two sorts.  The   first,   the   Anti-infallibilists,  rejected   the   dogma   of   infallibility as   in   itself   contrary  to   the   traditions  of   the   Church; Dollinger  described  it   as  an   "   ecclasiastical  revolution."  The others,  the   majority  it   seems,  admitted  the   dogma,   but   thought the   moment  inopportune  for   promulgating  it.  They   feared  to irritate  the   governments  and   increase  the   prejudice  against  the Church  produced  by   the   Syllabus  by   giving   the   impression  that the   Pope   was  aspiring  to   universal  domination.  These  were known  as   the   Inopp.ortunists;  they   belonged  to   the   Liberal  Catholic party.

The'   opposition  complained  of   the   rules  imposed  on   the   Council ;   of   the   attitude  of   the   presiding  cardinals,  who,   they   said,   kept the   opposition  orators  from  speaking  freely;   of   the   acoustic  defects of   the   place   of   meeting  (a   part   of   a   church) ;   of   the   lack   of stenographic  reports  of   the   sessions;  of   articles  sent  out   by   journalists of   the   Infallibilist  party   (the   French  bishops  drew  up against  Veuillot,  the   Postulata  a   pluribus  Galliarum  episcopis; the  Pope   sent  to   Veuillot  a  commendatory  note).  They   reproached their   opponents  with   hurrying   the   voting,   and   estimated that  the   bishops  of   the   minority  represented  in   themselves  a greater  number  of   Catholics  than  the   majority,  which  was  composed chiefly   of   Italians  (24,000,000  souls),   of   Orientals  (1,000,ooo),   and   bishops   without  dioceses.  The  Pope   complained  that the   secrecy  of   the   deliberations  had   been  violated  ; that   the   "   Letters from   the   Council,"  in   the   Augsburg  Gazette  in   January,  1870, revealed  to   the   public   discussions  which  should  have  remained secret.  He   was  offended  that  they   had   presumed  to   oppose  tradition to   him.  "   I   myself   am  tradition,"  he   said.  The   public   regarded the   struggle   as   a   conflict  between  the   Pope,   directed  by the   absolutist  Jesuits,   and   the   liberal  or  national  bishops.  Even to-day  it   is   hardly   possible  to   establish  historically  what  place this   rivalry   held   in   the   divisions  of   the   Council.

The  Council  had  to   deliberate  on  various  subjects,  divided among  4   deputations,  committees  on   faith,   discipline,  religious orders,  and   Oriental  rites.  The  main  point   was  the   definition  of the   articles  of   faith.  A   complete  scheme  had   been  drawn  up   in condemnation  of   errors,  conformably  to  the   Syllabus,  but   the dogma  of   infallibility  was  not   included  in   the   scheme.  Those who  advocated  the  promulgation  of   infallibility  addressed  a petition  to   the   Pope   signed   by   400   members,  begging  him   to 45

present  the   project  of   promulgation.  This  was  the   ground  of the   conflict.  The   majority,  supported  by   the   Pope,   pressed  the proposal  to   a   vote;  the   minority,  46   Germans  and   Austrians,  30 French,  and  20   Italians,  first  presented  an  address  begging  the Pope   "   not  to   impose   the   necessity  of   that   vote   "   (January,  1870). The  Pope   promulgated  a  new  regulation,  according  to  which decrees  were  no   longer   to   require   unanimity  for   their  adoption, but   only   a   majority  (February  20).   The  minority  replied  with a   "   representation  "   in   March.  The  Pope   then  had   a   new  article inserted  in   the   project   "   on   the   Church  of   Christ  " - the   formal declaration  of   infallibility.  The  majority  demanded  that  this article  should  be   discussed  before  any   other.

After  unanimously  voting  a   part   of   the   project   "   on   the   faith," the   Council  passed   on   to   the   dogma   of   infallibility,  in   spite   of   an address  from  77   members  protesting  against  the   change  in   the order  of   deliberations  (April   24).   The  reporter  (chairman  of committee)  Mgr.   Pie  of   Poitiers,  advocated  the   promulgation; he   introduced  a  new  argument:  St.   Peter  was  crucified  head downward,  his   head  bearing  the   weight   of   the   whole  body,   just as   the   Pope   bears  the   whole  Church.  Now,   it   is   he   who   bears that  is   infallible,  not  that   which  is   borne.  One  hundred  and thirty-nine  amendments  to  the   project  were  presented;  but  life in   Rome  was  becoming  more  and  more  unhealthy  and  unpleasant; the   majority,   urged   to   bring   matters  to   a   conclusion,  did not  wait   for   the   end   of   the   speeches   announced,  but   voted  to   close debate.  There  still  remained  40   who  wished  to  speak.  The chapter  "   concerning  the   Pope,"   containing  the   article  on   infallibility, was   voted   in   general   session  by   371   placet   against   88   non placet   and   61   placet   juxta   modum  (July   1.3).   The   minority,  of   115 members,  left   Rome  before  the   public   session  in   which  the   Constitutio  de   Ecclesia  was  adopted  by   547   votes  against   2   (July   18). France  had   just   declared  war  against  Prussia;  Rome  was  to   be evacuated  by   the   French  garrison  and   thus  left   without  defence against  the   Italians.  The  Pope   suspended  the   Council ;   then,   on October  20,   adjourned  it   indefinitely.

The  Vatican  Council  came  to   an  end   before  finishing  the   work for   which  it   had   been  convoked;  it   had   voted  only   the   chapters "   on   the   faith   "   and   4   chapters   "   on  the   Pope."  Its   part   was  reduced to   the   consecration  of   the   dogma   of   infallibility,  which recognised  in   the   Pope   the   exclusive  authority  in   matters  of faith.*  This  measure  did   not  produce  the   disasters  expected  by

*The  Pastor  ^Eternus  bull  of   July   18   defined  it   thus:  "The  Pope, when  he   speaks  from  the  throne,  ex  cathedra^  that  is   when,  in   exercising

those  who  opposed  the   promulgation.  All  the  bishops  submitted to   it.   There  now  remained  only   the   German  priests   and theologians.  These  refused  to  sign   the   declaration  required  by their  bishops,  and  established  a  new  Church  (1871);  but  the schism  of   the   Old   Catholics  remained  confined  to   Germany  and Switzerland,  and   even  there  it   was  confined  to   a   small  minority  of theologians  and   people   of   the   middle  class.  It   did   not  penetrate into  the   mass  of   the   faithful.  The  governments  expressed  disapprobation; but   they   thought  that  the   moment  had   passed   for laymen  to   interfere  in   matters  of   faith.  Austria  alone  forbade the   publication  of   the   decrees  of   the   Council;  a   number  of   German states  refused  them  the   placet.

Conflicts  between  Church  and  State. - After  the  reaction was  over  conflict  had  begun   once  more  between  the   Catholic Church  and  the  lay   governments.  The  most  violent  was  the Italian  conflict  on   the   subject   of   temporal  power  and   the   possession of   Rome.  The  Pope   declared  the   temporal  power  an   indispensable condition  for   the   exercise  of   his   spiritual   authority,  and the   political   struggle   became  one  of   religion.  The   Catholics  in all   the   countries  demanded  the  intervention  of   their  governments to   secure  the   re-establishment  of   the   temporal  power.  The Pope,   refusing  to   recognise  the   Kingdom  of   Italy,   continued  in his   addresses  to   protest  against   the   robbery  of   the   "   Piedmontese government  " ; he   forbade  Catholics  to   take   part   in   the   elections. The  Italian  government  had  adopted,  since  Cavour's  time,   the motto  of   the   Catholic  Liberals - A   free   Church  in   a   free   state. It   tried  to   introduce  the   Belgian  system  in   Italy.   On   the one   hand,   it   suppressed  all   that   remained  of   the   old   compulsory Church  authority,  Church  courts,  tithes  (1866),  and   established full   religious  liberty;  later  it   adopted  civil  marriage;  it   suppressed the   majority  of   the   convents,  and   secularized  the   Church estates,  replacing  them  with  salaries  for   the   secular  clergy.  On the   other  hand,   it   abolished  the   former  subjection  of   the   Church to   the   state,   leaving   the   Pope   free   to   appoint   bishops,   and   reserved to   the   clergy   their   honorary  privileges.  But   as   the   Pope the   office  of   pastor   and   teacher  of   all   Christians,  by   virtue  of   his   apostolic authority,  he   defines  a   doctrine  on   faith  or  morals  which  must   be   adhered to   by   the'   whole  Church,  possesses,  by   virtue  of   the   divine  aid   promised him  in   the   person  of   St.   Peter,  that  infallibility  with  which  the   Divine Saviour  wished  to   invest  his   Church  in   the   definition  of   doctrine  on   faith and  morals;  consequently  the   Pope's   definitions  under  these  conditions  are in   themselves  incapable  of   amendment,  even  by   the   consent  of   the Church."

## 708  THE   CHURCH  AND    THE    CATHOLIC  PARTIES.

refused  to   negotiate,  this   organization,  though   established  in   fact, remained  unrecognised  by   the   Church.

The  occupation  of   Rome  in   September,  1870,   greatly  aggravated the   conflict.  The   government,  by   the   law   of   guarantees, promised  to   let   the   Pope   enjoy   the   personal  situation  of   a  sovereign in   his   palace   of   the   Vatican,  to   grant   him   an  annual  compensation for   his   lost   revenues,  and   to   guarantee  him  absolute independence  in   his   office  as   head  of   the   Church.  It   abolished all   power  of   the   civil   authority  in   Church  affairs.  But   Pius  IX., declaring  himself  morally  a   prisoner,  refused  to  negotiate,  and shut  himself  up   in   the   Vatican;  he   could  not  go   into   the   city   of Rome,  where  he   was  exposed,  he   said,   to   a   meeting  with  enemies o-f   religion,   revolutionists  or   Protestants,  in   the   free   display   of their  opinions.  The  conflict  became  a  chronic  one  and   has   not yet   ceased.

In   Austria,  the   Constitution  of   1867,   which  guaranteed  religious liberty   contrary  to   the   Concordat,  opened   the   conflict  with the   Pope.  The  government  began  to   pass   laws  contrary  to   the Concordat;  the   Pope   declared  them  null,   by   virtue  of   his   apostolic authority,   thus   affirming  the   superiority  of   Church  authority, and   its   right   to   annul   the   acts   of   the   lay   power.   The Austrian  government  maintained  its   laws,   affirming  the   right   of the   lay   power  to   modify   by   its   own  sole   authority  even  a   regulation made   in   common  with  the   Church  authority.  It   then used  the   promulgation  of   infallibility  to   rid   itself  of   the   Concordat, which   it   had  already  violated.  It   declared  that   the   doctrine set   forth   by   the   Council  established  relations  between Church  and   State  on  an  altogether  new  footing,  by   enlarging  the Pope's  province  and  concentrating  all   the   powers  in   his   person; one  of   the   two  contracting  parties   having   changed  its   situation, the   contract  became  void.  The  conflict  continued  in   the   laws  of 1873,   and   Austria  returned  to   the   system  of   Joseph   II.,   but   without restoring   the   old   forms  of   state  guardianship.  The   Church found  itself   in   much  the   same  position  there  as   in   France,  except that   it   retained  its   control  of   marriage  and   records  of   population. trine

In   France,  up   to   the   end   of   the   Empire,   the   conflict  was  confined to   minor  questions - the   publication  of   the   Syllabus  in 1864,   the   struggle  of   the   bishops   (Dupanloup)  against   the   Duruy reforms  in   the   University,  against   the   creation  of   lay   schools  for girls,   and   against  the   materialistic  doctrines  of   the   professors. The  chief  effort  of   the   Catholic  party   bore  on   the   Roman  question, to   induce  the   government  to   defend  the   temporal  power.

This   was  a   period  of   sharp   controversy  between  the  Liberal Catholics  (Dupanloup)  and  the  Infallibilist  party   (Veuillot  and the   Univers).  The  conflict  ceased  during   the   war.  While  the National  Assembly  was  in   session  the  Catholic  party  tried  to bring   about  intervention  in   favour  of   the   temporal  power;   it   succeeded only   in   securing   the   creation  of   Catholic  universities. Then  came  the   "   anti-clerical  "   reaction,  which  led   the   Republican party   to   expel   the   unauthorized  religious  orders  (1880),   and deprived  the   clergy   of   the   control  of   the   primary  public   schools, which,  since  the   law   of   1850,   had   been   under  the   municipal  councils. This   left   to   the   clergy   only   the   private   schools.  In   1889 the   clergy   lost   even  the   exemption  from  military  service  which they   preserved  in   all   the   other  Catholic  states.

In   Spain   the   conflict  was  violent  after  the   revolution  of   1868; for   the   first   time   in   Spain   unity   of   faith   was  officially   abolished; the   Constitution  of   1869   proclaimed  the   public   liberty   of   nonCatholic  beliefs;  then,   the   clergy   having  opposed  the   government, the   Cortes  established  civil   marriage.  Pius  IX.   openly sided  with  Don  Carlos,  the   legitimate  King,   and   the   breach  was complete  between  the  Holy   See  and  the   Spanish  government until  the   restoration  of   1874.   The   Pope   consented  to   recognise the   government  of   AlphonsO'  XII.;  but   he   did   not  secure  the complete  restoration  of   unity   of   faith,   and   protested  against   the Constitution  of   1876,   which  granted  toleration  of   private  worship for   non-Catholics.

The  Russian  government  had  broken  official  relations  with  the Pope   in   1866,   in   connection  with  the   measures  for   Russification directed  against  the   Catholic  Church  of   Poland;  it   had   withdrawn its   ambassador  from  Rome  and  forbidden  the   Polish clergy   to   hold   any   communication  with   the   Pope.

In   Germany  and   Switzerland  the   conflict  was   indirectly  a   re- sult of   the   Council.  It   began   over  the   excommunication  of   the Old   Catholics.  It   led   to   a   complete  rupture  with   the   Holy   See. Pius  IX.   spent   his   last   years   in   protesting  against   the   violation of   Church  liberty   in   the   various  states  of   Europe.  He   showed his   indignation  in   addresses  to   pilgrims,  circulars  to   the   nuncios, or   brief   addresses  to   the   clergy   and   faithful  of   the   countries  in conflict.*

*   Address  to   the   German  Reading  Club,   June,   1872,   against  the   "   persecution of   the  Church  in   Germany"  directed  by   "the  prime  minister"; Pius  IX.   pronounced  the   famous  words  :   "   Who  knows  how   soon   the   little stone  shall  come  from  the   height   and   break  the   heel   of   this   colossus  ?  "-

## 710  THE   CHURCH  AND    THE   CATHOLIC  PARTIES.

He   died   leaving   the   Church  engaged  in   a   general   conflict  with the   civil   power.  Everywhere  the   Church's  official  authority  had declined.  It   had  lost   its   exclusive  control  in   the   central  states; even  Spain   had   escaped  from  unity   of   the   faith.  Italy   and   Austria had   adopted   the   system  of   religious  liberty.  Germany  had taken  from  the  Church  the  control  of   marriage  and  clerical autonomy.  In   France  and  Belgium  a  party  was  to  come  into power  which  was   hostile  to   the   Church  and   was  preparing  to   take away  the   schools  from  its   control.  All   these  struggles,  however, had,   by   exciting  the   ardour  of   the   Catholics,  obliged   them  to unite  and  get   rid   of   national  and   liberal  dissensions.  All   the Catholics  joined   in   a   disciplined  party,  armed  for   the   political fight.  The   Catholic  party  was  strong  enough  to   keep   the   power in   Belgium  from  1870   to   1878;   in   Switzerland  it   had   been  reorganized and   had   reconquered  the   old   cantons  of   the   Sonderbund; in   Prussia  and   Germany  it   had   just   created  the   centre;  in   Austria it   was  beginning  to   form  a   home  rule  party.  In   Spain   and France  it   remained  a  part   of   the   Conservative  party,  and  its principal  power.  The  economic  resources  of   the   party   had   just been  shown  on  the   occasion  of   the   thirtieth  anniversary  of   the accession  of   Pius  IX.,   in   1877;   the   gifts   sent  to   the   Pope   by   the Catholics  exceeded  $3,000,000.  The  Peter's  Pence,   consisting  of voluntary  contributions  from  the  faithful,  permitted  the  Holy See  to  cover  its   expenses  without  accepting  the  grant   from Italy.

Policy  of   Leo   XIII. - The  successor  of   Pius  IX.,   Pecci,  was elected,  it   is   said,   as   the   candidate  of   the   party   intermediate  between the   supporters  and   the   opponents  of   reconciliation  with Italy   (February,  1878).  He   had   been  the   pupil   of   Jesuits   and   the protege  of   Leo   XII.;   he   took  the   name  of   Leo   XIII.  He   had had   some  experience  in   politics,  having   been  delegate  or  prefect in   the   States  of   the   Church,  and   later  papal   nuncio  in   Belgium,

Consistory  of   Cardinals,  December,  1872;  address  against  the   attack  on   the Church  lands  in   Italy,   against  Germany,  the  Swiss  Confederation,  and Spain.- Encyclical,  November,  1873,  against  the  persecution  in   Germany and  Switzerland  and  the  protection  given   to   the  Old   Catholics. - Encyclical to   the   Prussian  prelates,  February,  1875;  which  declared  the   May   Laws null   and   void,   as  contrary  to   the   divine  institution  of   the   Church. - Address to   the   German  pilgrims,  May,   1877:  "   Many   centuries  ago   God  sent  Attila to   rouse  the   peoples;  to-day   he   has   aroused  the   noble  German  people   by   a new  Attila." - Address  to   the   Austrian  pilgrims:  "   To-day  revolution  controls the   world   against   the   will   of   the   nations." - Protest  against   the   accession of   Humbert  under  the  title  of   King   of   Italy,   January,  1878.

from  1843   to   1846,   the   time   when  the   Belgian  Catholic  party completed  its   organization.

The   political  doctrine  of   Leo   XIII.  on  the   relations  between Church  and   state  was  exactly  that  of   Pius  IX.;   he   expressed  in his   doctrinal  utterances  the   same  ideal  of   Christian  society   and reproduced  the   condemnations  of   the   Syllabus  against  modern society.  The  Encyclical  Inscrutabili  of   1878   condemned  "   the laws   destructive  of   the   divine  constitution  of   the   Catholic  Church, adopted  in   most  countries,  .   .   .   untrammelled  freedom  to   teach and  publish  all   sorts  of   evil."  *

The  Encyclical  of   December,  1878,  concerning  "modern errors,"  directed  against  socialists,  condemns  the   lay   state,  sovereignty of   the   people,f  and   lay   schools.J

The  Encyclical  "concerning  Christian  marriage"  (1880) claims  the   " legislative  and   judicial   control  "   of   marriage,  which the   Church  has   not  ceased  to   exercise  since  the   time   of   the   Christian Emperors,  and   rejects   "   the   distinction  made  by   regalists, who  separate  the   marriage  contract  from  the   sacrament  ...  so as   to   subject   the   contract  to   the   power  and   whim  of   the   prince."

The  Encyclical  "   concerning  the   origin   of   civil   power   "   (1881) condemns  the  theory  of   society  founded  on   free  consent,  "   the false  philosophy  "   of   the   eighteenth  century,  "   what  is   known

*   "   The  evils  which  overwhelm  humanity  from  every  side  "   come  "   from scorning  and  rejecting  the   authority  of   the   Church."  The  Pope   denounces "   that   extensive  subversion  of   the   supreme  truths  which  are  the   foundations of   human  society."  Comparing  "   the  epoch  in   which  we  live,  so hostile  to   religion  and   the   Church  of   Christ,  with  those  happy   times  when the   Church  was  worshipped  as  a   mother  by   all   nations,"  he   concludes  that the   cause  of   the   superiority  of   the   old   times,   "   so   much  more  prosperous," lay   in   the   fact   that   "   the   peoples   were  more  obedient  to   the   government and  laws  of   the   Church,"  while  our  epoch   "is   rushing  headlong  to   ruin." He  declares  lay   civilization  a   "   false  civilization."  He   condemns  the   civil marriage  established  by   "impious  laws,"  and  denounces  "the  citizens who  in   place   of   marriage  have  adopted  legal   concubinage."

f "This  new  impiety,  unknown  even  to   the  heathen,", by   which  "the states  have  been  constituted  without  taking  account  of   God  and   the   order He   has   established,"  which  has  announced  "   that  public   authority  derives its   principle,  its   majesty,  and   its   power   to   command,  not   from  God,   but from  the  multitude  of   the   people."

"   To   refuse  to   recognise  God   as   the   source  of   the   right   to   command  is   to wish  to   rob   political   power  of   its   splendour  and   cut   its   sinews.  To   say   that it   depends  on   the   will   of   the   people   is   first   of   all   to   commit  an   error,  and secondly,  to   establish  sovereignty  on  a   frail   foundation." \ "   The  Creator  and  Redeemer  of   mankind  shut  out  of   the   studies  of   the universities,  colleges,  and  high   schools."

as  modern  law  and  the  sovereignty  of   the   people   "   (imperium popular   e).

The  Encyclical  "   concerning  the  Free  Masons  "   (1884)  denounces them   as   supporters  of   the   lay   state,   who   "   shut  out  the very  wholesome  influence  of   the   Catholic  religion  from  the   laws and  government  "   and  end   by   "   building  up   a   state  wholly   independent of   the   institutions  and   precepts  of   the   Church."  It   renews the   condemnations  of   the   Masons  decreed  by   Pius  IX.

The  Encyclical  Immortale  Dei  (1885)   "   concerning  the   Christian constitution  of   states   "   condemns  "   the   expectation  of   seeking the   regulation  of   civil   life   elsewhere  than  in   the   doctrines approved  by   the   Church,"  enumerates  the  errors  of   the   "   new ideas  of   law,"   *   and   formally  recalls  the   condemnations  of   the Syllabts. ing

The  Encyclical  to  the  Hungarian  bishops  (1886)  condemns the   "   schools  termed  neutral,  mixed,  or   lay"   created  "   that   the scholars  may  grow  up   in   complete  ignorance  of   holy   things."

The  Encyclical  "   concerning  human  liberty   "   (1888)   denounces "   that   extensive  and   powerful  school  of   men  who  wish  to   be called  liberals"  the   "   supporters  of   liberalism,"  who  apply   the principles  of   naturalism  in   politics ; it   condemns  modern  liberties, liberty   of   creed,   liberty   of   opinion,  of   the   press,  of   education,!

*   The   ideas  condemned  are  the  natural  equality  and  liberty  of   all   men, sovereignty  of   the  people,  unfettered  freedom  of   opinion,  and  the  lay state  ("   The  state  makes  no  public  profession  of   religion;  it   must  not search  for   the   only   true  creed,   nor  prefer   one  to   another  .  .   .   but   must grant  to   all   equality  before  the   law.  .   .   Every   religious  question  must  be left   to   the   judgment  of   individuals;  each  man  shall  be   free  to   pursue  the religion  which  pleases  him,   or  even  none,  if   none  please  him  ").   The Encyclical  asserts  that  "   the   Church  no   less  than  the  state  is   a   perfect society  by   nature  and  by   right,"   and   that  "   the   governors  .  .   .   must  not deprive  it   of   any   rights   conferred  by   Jesus   Christ."

f They  are  thus  formulated:  "It  is   lawful  for   each  man  to   profess  the religion  he   prefers,  or  even  none."  .  .   (The   Pope   explains  that   this   liberty offered  to   man  confers  on   him  the  power  to   distort  or  even  desert,  with impunity,  the  most  sacred  of   duties.")  - "   The  state  has  no  reason  to express  any   form  of   belief  in   God  .   .  .   nor   to   prefer   one   belief  to   another, but  must  recognise  the  same  rights  in   all."  (The   Pope   explains  that "   justice   and   right   forbid  the   state  to   become  atheistic,  or,   which  would lead  to   atheism,  to   have  the   same  feeling  toward  various  religions  and   to grant  them  equal   rights  without  distinction.") - In   speech  and  press  the Pope   recognises  only   the   right   "   to   spread   freely   and   prudently  all   that  is true  and  honest  ";   but   as   for   ·'   false   opinions,"  it   is   just   that   public   authority should  repress  them,  that  they   may  not   be   allowed  to   extend  to   the ruin  of   the   state.

713

" which  are  vaunted  as   triumphs  of   our  times."  In   opposition to   liberalism  the   Pope   explains  the   nature  of   the   toleration  granted by   the   Church,  which  must  be   precarious.*

The   Encyclical  "   of   the   protection  of   St.   Joseph   and   the   Holy Virgin,  to   implore  their  aid   in   the   difficulties  of   the   times" (1889),  declares  the   present  time  "hardly  less  calamitous  for Christian  society  than  those  which  have  always   been  regarded as   the   most  calamitous."

Leo   XIII.  maintained  toward  the   Italian  government  the   same attitude  as   Pius   IX.  Never  did   he   cease  to   reclaim  temporal power  as   the   indispensable  condition  of   the   liberty   of   the   Holy See   and   the   free   exercise  of   spiritual   power.  Each  year,   in   his solemn  addresses  to   the   cardinals,  on   the   anniversary  of   his   coronation, March   5,   and   on   Christmas,  he   renewed  his   protest against  the   occupation  of   Rome  and  reserved  the   rights   of   the Holy  See.f  Like  Pius  IX.,   he   persisted  in   declaring  himself

*"   The   Church  would  like   to   introduce  Christian  principles  at   once  into practice  in   all   orders  of   the   state.  For   they   are  the   most  powerful  agent in   overcoming  the  evils  of   the   present  time  .   .   .   born  in   great  part   of these  boasted  liberties.  .  .   If   a  remedy  is   sought,  let   it   be   sought   in   the return  of   wholesome  doctrines.  .  .   Nevertheless,  in   her  maternal  judgment, the   Church  takes  account  of   human  frailty,   and   does  not   ignore   the tide  which  invades  our  epoch.  With  this  motive,  while  granting  rights only   to   true  and   honest  things,   she   does  not  oppose  the   public   power   in its   support  of   some  things   contrary  to   truth  and   justice   in   order  to   avoid  a greater  evil  or   to   secure  or  preserve  a   greater  good.   .   .   But  ...  the more  evil  a   state  has   to   tolerate,  the   more  that   state  is   cut   off   from  perfection; and   the   tolerance  of   evil  .   .   .   must  be   absolutely  circumscribed within  the  limits  that  public  safety  demands.  .  .   If,   in   view  of   the special  conditions  of   the   state,   it   happens  that  the   Church  agrees  to   certain modern  liberties,  not   that   she   prefers   them  in   themselves,  but   because she   judges   it   expedient  to   allow  them;  in   case  the   times  should  improve, she  should  use  her  liberty  ...  to   fulfil  the  duty   God  has  assigned  to her,   to   labour  for   the   eternal  salvation  of   mankind.  It   is   always   true  that this   liberty   for   all   men   in   all   things   is   not   desirable  in   itself,   because  it   is contrary  to   reason  that  the   false  should  have  the   same  rights   as   the   true." - The  Pope   condemns  not  only   "   the   separation  of   Church  and   state,"  but the   doctrine  "that  it   is   not  within  the   Church's  province  to   make  laws,   to judge,  or   to   punish,   and   that   she   must  confine  herself  to   the   exhortation,  per- suasion, and   direction  of   those   who   voluntarily  subject   themselves  to   her."

*   He   makes  besides  a   special  protest  against  the   law   which  transfers  to the   Italian  government  the  administration  of   the   possessions  of   the   Propaganda, an   international  congregation,  which  was  to   be   independent  of all   lay   authority  (1884);   against  the  anti-Catholic  demonstrations  at   the transfer  of   the   ashes  of   Pius  IX.   (1881);   against   the   monument  to   Giordano Bruno  (1889).

a   moral  prisoner,  and   made  it   a   rule   never  to   go   out  of   the   Vatican. He   never  officially   recognised  the   Italian  government;  he did   not  notify   it   of   his   accession;  he   refused  to   negotiate  with it,   to   accept   the   law   of   the   guarantees,  or  even  the   money   for his   civil   list.  He   forbade  Italian  Catholics  to   take  part   in   the elections.  Every  rumour  of   a  reconciliation  between  the   Pope and  the   King   of   Italy,   Leo   energetically  denied.  The  churchmen who   dared   to   propose  conciliation,  Curci  in   1884   and   Tosti in   1887,   were  disowned  and  forced  to  retract.  The  Catholic princes  who  visited  the   King   of   Italy   were  not  received  at   the Vatican,  Leo  accepting  only   Protestant  princes  under  these  conditions. Several   times,   in   1883,   1884,   and   1889,   a   rumour  was spread   about  that   the   Pope   was  going   to   move  his   residence  out of   Italy.   The   pilgrims  continued  to   regard   the   Pope   as   the   sovereign of   Rome,  and  sometimes  they   showed  this  by   crying: "   Long   live   the   Pope   King!   " can.

But   the   practical  policy   of   Leo   XIII.  was  not  that   of   Pius   IX. Instead  of   struggling  against  the   governments,  he   made  terms with  them,  except   in   Italy,   where  he   would  have  been  obliged   to sacrifice  the   principle  of   the   temporal  power.  Instead  of   prolonging the   conflict,  he   tried  to   end   it.   He   succeeded  in   renewing the   relations  which  Pius  had   broken  off   with  Switzerland, the   German  Empire,  and  Russia.  In   France,  during  the   struggle of   1880  against  the   congregations,  he   avoided  a   rupture  and gle   against   the   congregation  of   1880,   he   avoided  a   rupture  and confined  himself  to   approval  of   the   protests  made  by   the   French bishops.  Instead  of   leaving  the  Catholics  in   each  country  to fight   alone,   he   tried   to   take   the   direction  of   the   Catholic  parties and   press,  so  as   to   combine  their  action.

Like  Pius  IX.,   Leo  XIII.  waged   continual  war  on  the   Free Masons;  he   issued  a  special  encyclical  against  them,  the  Humanum  Genus  of   1884,   and   a   letter  to   the   Italian  people   in   1892, in   which  he   recommended  them  "   to   avoid  any  connection  with persons  suspected  of   belonging  to  the  Free  Masons  or  any similar  society."

His   policy   seems  to   have  been  to   form  in   each   country  a   Catholic party   which   should  represent  a   sufficiently  great   power  politically to   make  its   alliance  desirable,  and   to   offer  this   alliance  to the   government  in   return  for   concessions  to  the   Church.  In Germany  Leo  got   the  Centre  to  vote  for   the   military  law,   and after  long   negotiation,  gradually  secured  the   abolition  of   the measures  adopted  during  the  Culturkampf,  except  civil  marriage and   the   modifications  of   the   Prussian  Constitution.  In

England  he   assisted  the   government  against  the   Irish  agitation by   sending   to   Ireland,  in   1888,   a   nuncio  who   decided  against   the Land  League.  In   Russia  he   exhorted  the   Polish  clergy   to   obedience in   1894,   and   in   1895   secured  the   reappointment  of   a   Russian ambassador  to   the   Papal   Court.  In   France,  after  the   defeat of   the   Conservatives  in   1889,   ne   tried  to   establish  a   Catholic party   (1891-92)  by   ordering  the   Catholics  to   accept  the   Republican constitution  in   order   to   labour  for   the   repeal   of   laws   contradictory to   .the   rights   of   the   Church.

The   Pope   was  thus   led   to   interfere  in   the   domestic  policy   of   the governments.  At   first  he   met  resistance  from  the   leaders  of the   Catholic  parties,  who   were  accustomed  to   direct  the   policy of   their   party  - the   Irish   in   1883   and   1887,   the   German  Centre in   1887,   and   the   French  Conservatives  in   1891.   They   pretended to   distinguish  between  matters  of   faith,   in   which  every   Catholic is   bound  to   obey   the   Pope,   and   temporal  questions,  in   which every  man  is   independent.  Leo  XIII.  condemned  this  distinction as   contrary  to   the   legitimate  authority  of   the   Holy   See,   holding that   the   Pope,   as   head   of   the   Church,  is   the   only   judge   of the   interests  of   the   Church  and   that   the   faithful  have  no  right to   fix   the   limits  of   their   obedience.*  The   monarchical  unity   of religious  control,  proclaimed  at   the   Vatican  Council,  pointed  to unity   in   the   political   direction  of   all   Catholics.

After  the   attempts  at   socialistic  policy   by   the   German  government, Leo   also   interfered  in   the   social   movement  with   the   famous Encyclical  "   concerning  the   condition  of   the   working  classes  " (1891);  he   condemned  socialism  and  strikes,  preached  harmony between  capital  (res)   and  labour  (opera),  praised  industrial  corporations, and   recommended  the   creation  of   unions  of   Catholic workingmen.  .

Leo  XIII.  has  endeavoured  to   bring   the   Orthodox  churches into   Catholic  unity.   In   1884,   at   the   solemn  reception  of   the   Slavic Catholic  pilgrims,  Croats,  Czechs,  and   Galicians,  led   by   the   head of   the   Croat  nationalists,  Bishop   Strossmayer,  he   expressed  the hope   of   the   union  of   the   great   Slav   nation.  In   1894   he   pub-

*   In   France  the   Pope   signified  his   decision  by   repeated  acts,   in   1892. Letter  to   the   Archbishop  of   Paris,  January  5;   Encyclic  to   bishops  and faithful,  February  16;   Encyclic  to   French  cardinals,  May   6;   Letter  to French  Catholics,  June   14;   Letter  to   the  Bishop  of   Grenoble,  June   22: 11   When  politics   are  allied  to   religious  interests,  it   becomes  the   part   of   the head  of   the   Church  to   determine  the   best  means  to   defend  the   religious interests."

## 716  THE   CHURCH  AND    THE   CATHOLIC  PA  RITES.

lished  the   Encyclical  "   to   the   princes   and   peoples   of   the   world," inviting  into&gt;   the   union  the   Orientals  and   even  the   Protestants. He  convoked  a  conference  to  prepare  the   way   for   union,  and promulgated  a  regulation  for   the   Eastern  churches  which  came over  to   Rome,  guaranteeing  them  the   maintenance  of   their  religious rites.

In   the   course  of   the   nineteenth  century,  the   state  has   taken from  the   Catholic  Church  in   Europe  all   material  power;  it   has suppressed  compulsory  unity   of   faith  to  establish  religious  liberty. But   through   the   effective  concentration  of   all   Church authority  in   the   person  of   the   Pope,   now  an  absolute  sovereign, through  the   creation  in   all   the   countries  of   parliamentary  Catholic parties,   all   subject   to   a   common  centre,  through   the   enlargement of   the   clerical  body,   both  secular  and   regular,  through  the accumulation  of   wealth,  and   the   organization  of   Catholic  schools of   all   degrees,  the   Church  has   acquired  a  social  and  political power  which  is   certainly  superior  to   the   official  power  she   has lost.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.- Funk,  "   Hist,  de   1'Eglise,"  French  trans.,  2d   ed.,   2 vols.,   1895,   Catholic.- Kurtz,   "   Lehrbuch  der   Kirchengesch.,"  2  vols.,   gth edit.,   1885,   Protestant.

DOCUMENTS.- Collections  of   the  most  important  official  acts,  beside the  Papal  Acts,  "Collection  of   Addresses  ...  by   the  Pontiffs,"  are  : Walter,  "   Fontes  Juris   Ecclesiastici  .   .   .,"   1862,   for   conventions  with  the Holy  See. - "Acta  et   Decreta  Sacr.  Conciliorum  Recentiorum,"  7   vols., 1870-90  (vol.   vii.   on   Vatican  Council). - The  Encyclical  of   1864   and  the Syllabus  are  published  separately:  Raulx,  "   Encycl.  et   Docum.,"  etc.,  2 vols.,   1865.  The  great   Encyclicals  of   the   Popes,   as  well  as   the   Syllabus, in   a   popular   Catholic  collection  (with   a   Fr.   trans.),  "Apostolic  Letters  of Pius  IX.,   Gregory  XVI.,  Pius  VII."  (s.   d.   1893),   and  "   Apostol.  Letters  of His  Holiness  Leo  XIII.,"  4   vols.  (s.   d.)

The  speeches  of   Pius  IX.   and   Leo  XIII.  have  been  gathered  together  in Italian  collections,  the   "   Discorsi."

For  the   Council  :   Friedberg,  "   Sammlung  der   Aktenstucke  zum  Vatikan. Concil,"  1872,   Old  Cath.- Frond,  "Acteset  Hist,  du   Concile,"  8   vols.,  infol.- Friedrich,  "   Documenta  ad   Illustrandum  Concil.  Vatican.,"  1871.Veuillot,  "   Rome  Pendant  le   Concile,"  2   vols.,   1872.

The  chief  Catholic  periodicals  are  :   Civilta  Catholic  a,   since  1850  ; L'Univers&gt;  previous  to  1848   ;   Stimmen  aus  Maria  Laach  (German Jesuits),  since  1865   ; Etudes  Religieuses,  since  1856   (Jesuits)  ;   Le  Correspondant,  since  1829   (Cath.  Liberal).

WORKS.- The  general  Church  histories  :   Funk  (Cath.)  ;   Kurtz  (Prot.)

are  rather  summary. - Rohrbacher,  "   Hist,  de   1'Eglise,"  1842-49,  continued by   Cnantrel  and   Chamard,  "   Annales  Ecclesiastiques  "   is   an  uncritical  compilation.

MODERN  CHURCH  HISTORIES  :   Gams,  "   Gesch.  der   Kirche  Christi.,"  3   vols., 1854,   Cath.- Nielsen,  "   Gesch.  des   Papstthums  im   XIX.  Jahrhundert,"  2 vols.,   1880  (Danish).

SPECIAL  HISTORIES:  For  Germany,  Nippold,  "   Handb.  der  Neuesten  Kirchengesch.,"  3d   ed.,   4   vols.,   1883-92;  Briick,   "Gesch.  der  Kathol.  Kirche im   XIX.  Jahrh.,"  vols.  i.-iii.,   1887-96,  goes   to   1870.

BIOGRAPHIES  OF  THE  POPES  (see   Kurtz  and  Funk)  :   The  chief  of   these  are  : Artaud,  "Hist,  de   Pie   VII.,"  2   vols.,   1837,   "   de   Leon  XII.,"  1843,   "de  Pie VIII.,"  1844.- Pougeois,  "   Hist,  de   Pie  IX.,"  6   vols.,  1877-86,  prolix. O'Keilly,  "   Life   of   Leo   XIII.,"  1877.

VATICAN  COUNCIL  :   Cecconi,  "   Storia  del   Concilio,"  1873   (Fr.   trans.,  "   H. du   Concile,"  4   vols.,   1887),   Roman. - Friedrich,  "   Gesch  des   Vatikanischen Concils,"  2  vols.,  1877-83,  Cath.  opposition.- Friedberg,  "Samml.  der Aktenstticke,"  already  mentioned,  gives   a   condensed  history,  opposition. Arthur,  "The  Pope,   the   Kings  .  .  .,"2   vols.,  1877,   Prot.

OLD  CATHOLICS:  Schulte,  "   Der  Altkatholicismus  .    .    .,"1887.

LIBERAL  CATHOLICS:  A.   Leroy-Beaulieu,  "   Les  Catholiques  Liberaux  .   .  . de  1830  a  nos  jours,"  1885,   interesting  sketch. - Minghetti,  "   L'Etat  et 1'Eglise,"  trans,  from  the  Italian,  1882,  doctrine  of   the   Italian  liberal Catholics.

ECCLESIASTICAL  LAW:  liberatore,  "   La  Chiesa  e   lo   Stato,"  1871   (Fr. trans.);  "   Le   Droit  Public  de   1'Eglise,"  1888.- Tarquini,  "Juris.  Eccles. Publ.  Institutiones  ; Principes  du   Droit  Public  de   1'Eglise,"  1891  ;   both expound  the  pontifical  doctrine. - Hergenr other,  "   Lehrb.  des  Kathol. Kirchenrechts,"  1888,  Cath.- Pbilipps,  "   Kirchenrecht,"  8   vols.,  3d   edit., 1872-89,  Cath. - Bichter,  "Lehrb.  des, Kathol.  u.   Evangel.  Kirchenrechts," 8th   ed.,   1886,   Prot.,   expounds  German  law   in   particular.

## CHAPTER  XXIV.

## THE  INTERNATIONAL  REVOLUTIONARY  PARTIES.

Free  Masons  and   Carbonari. - Free  Masonry,  which  had  in   the eighteenth  century  become  a  society  for   the   propagation  of   humanitarian doctrines,   was  a   kind  of   international  federation,  without the   character  of   a   political   party.   But   in   endeavouring  to establish  religious  liberty,   it   brought  itself  into   conflict  with   the Church,  which  condemned  it   as  a   heresy   in   1738   and   1751.   In so   far   as   it   was  preparing  for   the   destruction  of   the   coercive power  of   the   churches,  it   became  a   revolutionary  association.

After  the   French  Revolution,  when  the   system  of   the   lay   state was  established,  it   became  once  more  a   peaceful  society,   without precise  political  aim.  After  the  Restoration,  in   the   countries which  preserved  religious  liberty,  it   remained  a  secret  society in   name,  with   secret  rites   and   mysterious  meetings,  but   tolerated in   fact,   in   some  cases  even  encouraged.  It   drew  its   members from  among  the   well-to-do  middle  classes,  and   even  from  among the   high   officials,  often  choosing  members  of   the   government  as its   dignitaries.  In   the   central  countries,  where  Catholicism  was again   obligatory,  the   Free  Masons  were  a   really   secret  society, prohibited,  pursued,  and  consequently  revolutionary,  recruited principally  among  the   free-thinking  young  men  of   the   bourgeoisie and   discontented  army  officers.  In   Spain,   Portugal,  and Italy,   and   especially  in   the   States  of   the   Church,  the   Free   Masons conspired  against  the   government.

The  Free  Masons  of   different  countries  had   but   one  principle in   common,  namely,  religious  liberty.  They   supported  every form  of   government,  and   did   not  call   themselves  republican.  In actual  fact   they   were  chiefly   from  the   liberal  parties,   hostile  to the   clergy   and   to   absolute  government.  The   society   was  organized in   self-governing  lodges  united  as  a   federation,  ordinarily as  a  national  federation - each  nation  having  a   Grand  Master and   a   Supreme  Council.  '

The  Free  Masons  kept   themselves  in   communication  from one  country  to   another,  and   had   international  signs   of   recogni-

718

tion.  It   is   probable  that   those  of   the   constitutional  countries worked  against  the   governments  that  persecuted  their  fellows; it   is   also   possible   that   the   Masons  had   transmitted  from  one country  to   another  a  certain  idea,   somewhat  vague,  of   a   liberal constitutional  system.  Was  there,  beside  the  national  official organization,  a  secret  international  directory,  working,  in   addition to   the   acknowledged  doctrines  and   aims,   to   make  a   republican, lay   revolution  in   all   the   countries?  This  is   the   view  of certain  Catholic  writers,  Cretineau-Joly,  Father  Deschamps, Claudio  Jannet.  It   is   not  possible  to   settle  it   historically;  we can  only   see  that   there  was  no  unity   of   political   doctrine  among Free  Masons,  that  a  number  of   revolutionary  leaders  have  been Free  Masons,  that  some  have  gone   into  the   Masonic  lodges   to win  supporters,  perhaps  even  to   propagate  revolutionary  ideas there.  But  there  is   nothing  to   show  that   they   worked  for   revolution as   Free  Masons.

The  Restoration  governments  differed  in   their  conduct  toward the   Free  Masons.  The  Protestant  states  left   them  alone.  In France  the  Liberal  ministries  (Descazes)  favoured  them.  The Tsar  of   Russia,  Alexander  L,   encouraged  the   creation  of   lodges. Metternich,  on  the  contrary,  forbade  all   associations  and  denounced to   the   other  governments  the   intrigues  of   the   sects,  as he   termed  all   political  or  religious  societies,  including  the   mysticists  and   Bible  societies.  He   took  advantage  of   the   associations of   German  students  (which  were  probably  purely  national and   without  connection  with  Free  Masonry),  and   more  emphatically of   the   revolution  in   Spain   and   Italy,   to   ask   the   Tsar   to suppress  secret  societies  (1820-21).  Alexander  decided,  in   1822, to   forbid  Free  Masonry  in   Russia.

The  action  of   the   secret  societies  was  confined  to   unsuccessful revolutions  in   Spain   and  Italy,   and  unsuccessful  conspiracies against  the   Bourbons,  from  1820  to   1822;  and   perhaps  to   the

After  the   absolutist  restoration  in   Naples,  the   secret  society of   Carbonari,  hitherto  exclusively  Italian,  entered  into   relations with  the   French  revolutionists,  perhaps  with  the   Free  Masons. The  French  Charbonnerie  was  then  constituted  on  the  Italian model,  in   1821,   by   the   founders  of   a   Masonic  lodge,   the   Friends of   Truth,   Buchez,  Joubert,  Bazard,  and  Flottard.  This  was, however,  a   national  society,  with  a  national  platform,  the   expulsion of   the   Bourbons  (see   p.   122).   The   only   international organization  was  the   Cosmopolitan  Alliance,  founded  by   certain leaders  of   the   French  Liberals,  among  them  Lafayette.

## 720        THE  INTERNATIONAL  REVOLUTIONARY  PARTIES.

revolt  of   the   Russian  Decabrists  (see   p.   558),   but   they   helped   to form  in   France  the   little   Republican  party   which  made  the   revolution of   1830,   and  in   Belgium  the   Liberal  party,  which  was organized  by   Defacqz,  Grand  Master  of   the   Free  Masons  (see p.   246).

The  Republican  "   Young  Europe." - In   imitation  of   the   French Republican  party,  Republican  parties  were  formed  in   several countries  after  1830.  They   were  recruited  among  the  young men  and  workingmen,  and  were  particularly  active  in   the   feebly governed  states,  Germany,  central  Italy,   and  Poland.  These parties   were  in   communication  from  one  country  to   another,  but were  without  international  management;  their  action  in   each country  was  limited  to   demonstrations  in   favour  of   the   revolutionists of   the   other  countries;  they   demanded  first  of   all   intervention to   aid   the   Poles  in   their  rebellion  against   the   Tsar,   and the   subjects  of   the   Pope   in   their  attempt  at   revolution.

After  the   failure  of   the   revolts  Mazzini  endeavoured  to   establish a   political   association  to   make  methodical  preparation  for revolution  and  set  up   a   democratic,  lay   republic.  The  organization, primarily   Italian  with   a   foreign   centre,  became  very quickly  European  (see   p.   335).   Young   Italy   became  a   branch  of Young  Europe.  It   was  founded  to  unite  all   Italy   in   a  single state,   "   a   republic   one  and   indivisible  "  ;   the   members  promised to   obey   and   keep   the   secret;  a   secret  tribunal  condemned  traitors and  chose  some  of   their  members  to   kill   them. lish

Mazzini  succeeded  in   organizing  several  national  sections, Young  Italy,   Young  Poland,  Young  Germany,  Young  Switzerland, Young   France,  and   Young   Spain.  These  were  composed of   men  over  forty   years  of   age,  chiefly   belonging  to   the   bourgeoisie. They   were  all   federated,  under  Mazzini's  direction. This  man's  extraordinary  activity  accomplished  only   conspiracies, unsuccessful  outbreaks,  and   some  assassinations.  After  1848 Young  Europe  broke  up,  without  having  gained  any   direct  political result.  But   the   republican  groups   in   France,  Germany,  Switzerland, and   Poland  served  as  revolutionary  centres  from  which communist  and  socialist  parties  have  sprung.

Mazzini  continued  to   plot   to   make  Italy   a   republic  and   expel the   Austrlans.  He   incited  the   Orsini  attempt  against  Napoleon III.,   for   having   failed  to   keep   his   oath   to   deliver  Italy.   During the   period   in   which  the   unity   of   Italy   was  getting   accomplished (1859-70),  he   was   in   communication  with  the   heads  of   the   Italian government,  perhaps  with  King   Victor  Emmanuel,  with  the

Hungarian  refugees,  Kossuth,  Generals  Tiirr  and  Klapka,  and with   the   Polish  insurgents.  Attempts  were  made  to   organize  a general  insurrection  against  Austria.  This  was  not,   however, an   international  party;   it   was  only   a   coalition  of   national  revolutionists.

The   Socialistic  Schools. - While  the   republican  parties   were  beginning to   prepare  a   political  revolution,  parties   of   a   new  character were   formed,   who   laboured  after  a   social  revolution. acter

The   movement  began   under  the   Restoration,  1814-30,  simultaneously in   England  and   France,  by   slow  and   confused  work  over the   adoption  of   doctrines.  Certain  peace-loving  philanthropists, Owen  and   Thomson  in   England,  Saint-Simon  and  Fourier  in France,  criticised  modern  society.  Taking  it   up   where  the eighteenth  century  philosophers  had  left   it,   they   did   not  stop   at political  institutions,  but   took  up   social  institutions, - private property,  inheritance,  the   family,   and   wages - institutions  which were  regarded  as   the   very   foundations  of   society   by   the   philosophers and   economists.  The   creation  of   the   factory   system   began to   produce  a   change,  already  visible  in   the   more  advanced countries,  England  and  France.  It   had  formed  a   new  class  of wage-earners,  having  nothing  but  their  daily   wages  to   live   on, and   reduced  during   industrial  crises  to   starvation  and   wretchedness. People   began   to   talk   of   the   proletarians,  an  old   Roman name  revived  to   designate  a   new  class,   and   of   pauperism,  a   new sort  of   distress  caused  by   industrial  wealth. ness.

The   objections,  though   very   different  in   form,   may   be   reduced to   two   fundamental  ideas:

1.   Society   was  too   hard  on  the   poor,   inflicted  on  them  too much  suffering,  too  mean  and   uncertain  wages,  an  unhealthy  occupation, laborious  and   brutalizing,  too   long   working   hours,   a servile  dependence  on  the   master  and   his   foreman,  small,   dirty, and   unhealthy  lodgings,  unwholesome  food,   a  sad   and   disorderly life,   and   prostitution  for   the   women.     The   protest  against   this system  took  a  sentimental  form  of   compassion  for   the   poor,   indignation against   the   rich,   mingled   with   early   Christian  reminiscences and   ranting   speeches.     It   was  expressed  in   France  by   the formula  "   To   each  according  to   his   needs,"  or   in   judicial   language, the   right   to   existence.

2.   Society   was  organized  contrary  to   justice.     Property  and inheritance  divided  men  into  two  unequal  classes.     From  this inequality,  consecrated  by   law   contrary  to   the   principles  of   1789, arose  an   injustice  in   dividing  the   products  of   labour.    The   cap-

## 722       THE  INTERNATIONAL  REVOLUTIONARY  PARTIES.

italist  kept   the   product  and   gave   the   labourer  only   a   wage,  obviously inferior   to   his   worth,   since   the   employer's  wealth  increased, although  it   was  not   he   that   had   done  the   work.  This  demand was  expressed  in   the   phrase   "   To   each  according  to   his   works," or,   in   judicial   language,  right   to   the   full   product   of   labour.  Combining the   two   formulae  the   next   demand  was   for   the   right   of labour - the   right   of   existence  through  labour.

The  authors  of   this   social  theory,   later  called  socialists,  attributed the   vices   of   society   to   its   economic  organization,  private property,  inheritance,  wages,  and  free  competition,  which  they also   reproached  with  the   wasting  of   forces.  As   to   remedies  they could  not  agree.  Before  1830,   however,  two  systems  had   already been  set   forth:  that   of   Owen  and   that   of   Saint-Simon,  perfected by   Bazard.  The  official  organ  of   the   S'aint-Simonians,  the   Globe (1830),   took  for   its   motto:  "   All   social  institutions  must  have  as their  object   the   bettering  of   the   moral,   material,  and   intellectual conditions  of   the   poorest  and   most  numerous  class ;   all   privileges of   birth   must  be   abolished  without  exception.  To   each  accord- ing to   his   capacity,  to   each   capacity  according  to   its   works/'" A   second  generation  of   socialists,  P.   Leroux  Considerant, L.   Blanc,   and   Proudhon  in   France,  Rodbertus  and   Mario  (pseudonym of   Winkelblech)  in   Germany,  completed  the  social theory.

All   the   socialists  except   Louis  Blanc  were  outside  of   political life,   and   confined  themselves  to   the   propagation  of   their  ideas. Some  of   them  tried  to   create  a   model  society,   to   test  their   reform on  a  small  scale - the  St.-Simonians,  Owen,  the  Fourierists, Cabet,   and   the   Icarians  ; but   they   did   not   organize   political   parties. They  were  nevertheless  the   fathers  of   socialism.  It   was  they who  conceived  all   the   criticisms  of   existing   society,   all   the   formulas, even   the   practical   means  of   action  and   the   measures  of   socialistic reform.  Previous  to   1848   there  was  already  talk   of "   exploitation  of   man   by   man,"   of   the   "   right   to   labour,"  of   "   surplus value,"   anarchy,  social  democracy,  inter-class  struggles, workingman's  party,  international  understanding  between  workingmen,  emancipation  of   the   proletariat,  organization  of   labour, industrial  federation,  and  the   like.  Co-operative  association  of producers  was  proposed.  'National  workshops,  gratuitous  loans, bank  of   exchange,  superannuation  fund,   laws  for   the   protection of   industry,  collective  ownership,  progressive  taxation,  general strike,  eight-hour  day,   workingmen's  congresses,  etc.,  were advocated.

The  socialist  parties,  which  were  formed  later,   lived  on  the intellectual  labour  of   the   first   half   of   the   century.

The   Communist  Parties. - The  socialist  schools  did   not  constitute a   revolutionary  party.  The  movement  toward  social  revolution began   first   in   the   revolutionary  republican  party   in   Paris under  the   form  of   a   revival  of   Babeuf 's   communism  ; it   was  a   survivor of   Babouvism,  Buonarotti,  who  converted  Voyer   d'Argenson,*   and   later   those  who   were  accused  in   the   April   prosecutions (see   p.   139).   A   communist  party   detached  itself  from  the   French Republican  party,   demanding  a   social  revolution  by   the   abolition of   private   ownership.  Its   further  doctrines  remained  rudimentary: it   was  first  of   all   a  party   for   revolutionary  action  (see p.   150).   But   the   communist  propaganda  had   reached  Germany. In   Germany  a   division  similar  to   that   in   the   French  party   had taken  place   in   the   revolutionary  democratic  party  of   1833   (see p.   382).   Biichner  founded  in   Hesse  a   secret  society,  the   Rights of   Man,   and   in   1834   addressed  the   peasantry  in   a   paper   beginning: "Peace  to   the   cottages!  War  on   the   palaces."  He   declared political   revolution  impossible  without  a   social  revolution.

In   Paris,  the  German  workmen  and  refugees  founded,  in 1836,   a   secret  society,   the   Bund  der   Gerechten  (League  of   the Just),   which  quickly  took  the   name  of   Alliance  of   Communists and   organized  itself  as  a   federation.  It   consisted  of   groups  called communes,  federated  in   clubs,   which  sent  delegates  to   a   congress, where  a   central  authority  was  chosen  to   direct  the   whole  league. The  Alliance  of   Communists  was  in   relations  with  workingmen's clubs  (Arbeiterbildungsvereine)  for   reading,  study,   and   discussion, where  it   worked  to   win   support.

The  Alliance,  created  in   Paris,   gathered  adherents  in   the   countries of   political  liberty:  in   Switzerland,  where  the   tailor  Weitling   settled  himself  in   1841   and   spread   the   doctrine  among  the German  workingmen;f  in   England,  where  a   refugee,  Schapper, founded  a   "commune"  at   London,  in   1840;   in   Belgium,  where Karl  Marx  and  Engels  founded  a  group  at   Brussels  in   1845.

*   In   1838   d'Argenson  and   Ch.   Teste  were  prosecuted  for   a   communistic pamphlet.  Teste  proposed  a  social  reform  thus  conceived:  "Art.  i.   All real  and  personal  estate  .   .   .   belongs  to   the   people,  who   alone  may regulate  its   distribution.- Art.  2.   Work  is   a  necessary  duty   of   evsry citizen." f Weitling  preached  a   sentimental  doctrine- liberty,  equality,  harmony; he   wished  a   bloodless  revolution,  attacking  only   property.  "   The   Gospel of   the   Poor   Fisherman  "(1843)   was  a   communistic  interpretation  of   Christ's doctrines.

## 724       THE  INTERNATIONAL   REVOLUTIONARY  PARTIES.

Germans  predominated  in   all   these  groups;  they   were  chiefly workmen  in   the   superior  metals,  and   Jews,   in   relations  with  the radical  German  poets,   Freiligrath,  Herwegh,  Gutzkow,  and  with the  democrats  who  directed  the  publication  named  the  Vorw'drts.  The   French  government  suppressed  the   paper  and   exiled some  of   its   editors - Karl  Marx,  who  went  to   Brussels,  Moses Hess,  who  went  back  to   Germany.  There  was  at   that  time  in the   Rhine  region,  Cologne,  Treves,  and  Diisseldorf,  a  centre  of communist  propaganda,  publishing  prohibited  writings.  There were  also  communist  demonstrations  in   the   manufacturing  regions of   Silesia,   and   a   secret  society   was   discovered  there,   which was  perhaps  without  connection  with  the  international  movement. The   weavers'  revolt  in   1844,   made  famous  by   G.   Hauptmann's  drama,  seems  to   have  been  only   a   bread  riot.

To   escape  the   prosecutions  that  followed  the   Blanqui-Barbes trial   in   1840   the   central  authorities  of   the   Alliance  moved  from Paris  to   London,  where  they   remained  until  1848.  In   1846   they persuaded  Karl  Marx  and  Engels,  who  were  then  at   Brussels, to   join   the   Alliance,  and   asked  them  to   draw  up   a  manifesto, which  was  accepted  by   the   Congress  of   1847.   This  was  the   celebrated Manifesto  of   the   Communist  Party,   published  early   in   1848, before  the   Revolution.  It   passed   unnoticed  at   the   time,   but   it   has of   late   years   become  the   gospel   of   the   collectivist  party,   for   it   contains already   all   Marx's  doctrines  in   a   concise  and   vivid  form. It   was   divided  into  4   parts:  i.   Capitalists  and   proletarians,  history of   the   social  evolution  ; *   2.   Proletarians  and   communists,  justi-

*   The   fundamental  ideas  are:  i.   "   The  history  of   all   society   to   the   present day   is   simply   the   history   of   struggles  between  classes.  Society  is divided  more  and  more  into  two  hostile  classes,  Capitalists  and  Proletarians."-  2.   "Every   class  struggle  is   a   political  struggle."  "Political power  is   the   organized  power  of   one  class  for   the   suppression  of   another.'' "   Modern  government  is   simply  a  committee  for   the   administration  of   the affairs  of   the   capitalist  class." - "   3.   The  factory  system  has   created  the market  of   the   world."  "   By   exploiting  the  world's  market,  the   capitalist class  gives   a   cosmopolitan  character  to   production  in   all   countries;  it   has taken  from  industry  its   national  basis."  Society  has   become  international. - 4.   ' '   The  capitalist  class  .   .   .   has   created  more  varied  and   more  colossal productive  forces  than  all   past   generations,"  but  "   the   system   has   become too  narrow  to   hold  the   wealth  created  within  it";   hence  "   the   paradoxical epidemic  of   over-production."  The  middle  class  has   produced  crises  more and  more  general. - 5.   "   The  capitalist  class  has   produced  .   .  .   men  who will   deal   it   its   deathblow,  the   modern  workingmen,  the   proletarians  .  .  . crowded  into  the  factories,  with  military  organization."  They  "   are   increasing in   power  and  are   becoming  conscious  of   their  power, "re-enforced

fication  of   the   doctrines  and   practical  program  of   the   party;   *   3. Socialist  and   communist  literature,  criticism  of   socialist  doctrines, reactionary  socialism,  bourgeois  socialism  (Proudhon),  criticoUtopian  socialism  and   communism  (Owen,  Fourier,  Cabet) ;   4.   Position of   communists  in   face   of   the   various  opposition  parties,   party policy.

The   conclusion  is   international  and   revolutionary.  "   The   communists labour   for   the   union   of   democratic  parties   in   all   countries. They   do   not   stoop   to   dissimulate  their   opinions   and   aims. They   proclaim  aloud  that   their  ends  could  not   be   attained  without the   violent  overturning  of   all   existing   social  order."  And the   manifesto  ends   with   the   famous  appeal :   "   Proletarians  of   all nations,  unite." tries.

The   Bevolutionary  Parties  during   the   Revolution  of   1848  and the   Reaction. - The   revolutionary  parties,  political  and   social,   republican, democratic,  socialist,   communist,  formed  in   Europe   before 1848   only   little   isolated  groups   in   certain  cities,   tracked  by the   police,   obliged   to   work  in   secret  and   often  to   hide   or   leave the   city,   ignored  or  scorned  by   the   public.  The  French  revolution of   1848,   made  by   the   action  of   the   socialist  democratic party,   in   the   name  of   equality   and   'the   Republic,  excited  the   hopes of   all   European  revolutionists.  Refugees  returned  to   their  na- by   the   lower  middle  class,   the   artisans,  the   peasants  who  are   falling   into the  proletariat." - 6.   "   Until  now  all   historic  movements  have  been  produced by   minorities  to   their  own  profit.  The  proletarian  movement  is the   movement  of   the  immense  majority  for  the  benefit  of   the   majority." It   begins   with  "   a   national  struggle  "   in   each  country.  But   it   will   become international,  for   "workingmen  have  no  country."

*The  communists  defend  "the  common  interests  of   the  proletariat"; their  propositions  are  not   inventions  of   world  reformers,  they   are  confined to   the   ' '   expression  of   the   actual  conditions  of   an  existing  class  contest,  of an   historical  movement";  their  aim  is   to   organize  the   proletarians  in   a class  party,  to   have  the   proletariat  gain   political  power,  and  to   abolish middle-class  property  ownership,  "   created  by   the   labour  of   wage-earners for   the   profit   of   capitalists."  Capital  is   "a   social  power,"  it   will   become common  property.  This  will  be   the  abolition  of   "   middle-class  freedom  " (of   commerce),  of   the   "middle-class  family,"  of   traditional  religion  and morality,  and  of   hostility  between  nations.  The  revolution  will   be   made by   a   political   process.  As   transitional  measures,  the   manifesto  proposes: i.   the   confiscation  of   land  rent;  2.   highly   progressive  direct  taxes;  3. abolition  of   inheritance;  4.   confiscation  of   the   property  of   emigrants;  5. centralization  of   credit  by   a   national  bank  with  public   capital   and   exclusive monopoly;  6.   centralization  of   all   means  of   transportation;  7.   national manufactories,  national  cultivation  of   the   land;   8.   compulsory  labour for   all;   9.   public   free   education  for   all   children.

tive   lands,   in   Germany  and   Italy,   to   join   in   the   revolution.  The revolutionists  remained  in   communication,  from  country  to   country, some  of   them   even  went  to   other  countries  to   aid   the   democratic insurgents  against   the   governments.  The   Poles  in   particular took   part   in   all   the   European  insurrections,  and   intervention in   favour  of   Poland  was   demanded  by   the   revolutionary parties   in   France  and   Germany.  The  Revolution  of   1848   was not,   however,  the   work  of   an   international  party.   The  revolutionists of   the   different  nations  excited  one  another  by   example and  encouragement,  but  they   made  only   national  revolts,  without common  direction.

In   France  the   revolutionists,  at   the   head  of   the   government, divided  into  democratic  republicans,  opposing  social  revolution, and   democratic  socialists.  The  discord  led   to   civil   war.  In   the other  countries  the   republicans,  forced  to  struggle  once  more against   monarchical  government,  remained  united  (Prussia,  Germany, Austria-Hungary,  and   Italy);   the   difference  in   doctrine remained  theoretical  and  did  not  hinder  the  communists  and socialists  from  working  in   harmony  with  the   democratic  republicans. But   a   number  of   industrial  organizations  were  founded in   Germany.  A   social-democratic  union  of   workingmen  in   Berlin held   a   workingmen's  congress  in   August,  1848,   out  of   which grew  the   Fraternity,  a   German  federation  of   workingmen,  who took  part   in   the   revolutions  of   Baden  and  Dresden.  In   the west,  at   Cologne,  Karl  Marx  founded  a  communist  newspaper; a   socialist  workingmen's  union  was  established,  and   an  assembly voted  a   bill   to   establish  a   "   social  democratic  republic   "   (September, 1848).   After   the   coup   d'etat   at   Berlin,   the   communists  issued a   proclamation  for   the   refusal  of   taxes;  Marx  at   Cologne  and Lassalle  at   Diisseldorf  were  prosecuted  for   inciting  revolt.  In the   Frankfort  Parliament  sat  a   number  of   socialist  deputies,  who demanded  recognition  of   the   right   to   labour.  In   Italy   the   movement remained  democratic  and   national. cans\_

The  reaction  of   1849   and  1850   destroyed  the   revolutionary groups;  the   communists,  prosecuted  in   Germany,  France,  and even  Belgium  and  Switzerland,  fled  to   London.  The  Alliance was  reorganized  there  in   1849   and   tried  to   renew  relations  with the   communes  in   Germany,  France,  and  Switzerland,  but   it   was cut   into   two  groups,  one  of   which,   under  Willich,  wished  to   continue preparations  for   an  armed  revolution;  the   other,   under Marx,  wished  to  confine  itself  to  the   propagation  of   the   doctrine. The   Marx   group  moved  to   Cologne  and   was  surprised

by   the   police,  in   1851.   The  subsequent  prosecution  of   the Cologne  communists,  who  were  condemned  for  high   treason, obliged  Marx  to   dissolve  his   group.  The  Diet,   on  the   request of   the   two  great  powers,  passed   a   decree,  in   1854,   obliging  all the   German  governments  to   dissolve  all   political  societies  of workingmen.  The  Willich  group  retained  the  management  of the   societies  in   Switzerland,  Brussels,  and   France,  and  even  established an   "   international  social-democratic  committee  ";   it   was discovered  by   the   French  police.

The  socialists,  reduced  to   hiding,   disappeared  completely  from public   life;   the   governments,  warned  by   the   revolution  of   1848, took  measures  against  revolutionary  propagandism ;   the   movement seemed  to   have   definitely   failed.  L.   Reybaud,  writing   the history  of   the   socialists,  said:  "   Socialism  is   dead;   to   mention  it is   to   pronounce  its   funeral  oration."

When  political  life   began   again   after  1859,   a   doctrine  was preached  which  seemed  new  to   most  people   of   the   time,   so  completely   was  socialism  forgotten.  Yet  it   was  simply   a   revival  of the   socialist  movement  of   the   days   previous  to   1848;   the   leaders were  the  men  of   '48,   Karl  Marx,  Lassalle,  Liebknecht,  who taught  a  new  generation  the   doctrines,  formulae,  and   procedure of   the   former  socialists.

The  revival  was  brought  about  simultaneously  by   two  independent and   even  rival   creations,  Karl   Marx'  International  Association and   Lassalle's  German  National  Party.

The  International  (1862-72). - The  new  socialist  organization began  in   London,  the   centre  of   socialist  refugees,  the   residence of   Karl   Marx.  The  first  step   was  taken  by   the   leaders  of   the English  workingmen,  the   general  secretaries  of   the   trade  unions. The  occasion  was  the   London  Exhibition  of   1862,   where  the English  workingmen  met  delegates  from  the   French  and   Belgian working  classes.  They   met  again,   in   1863,   in   a   great   meeting held  in   London  to   protest   in   favour  of   the   Polish  insurgents.  To this   French  delegates  also   were  sent.  The   idea   of   international association  was  mentioned.

The  Frenchmen  were  men  of   a  new  generation  (Tolain,  Fribourg),  who  were  not  acquainted  with  the   socialists  of   1848;   their ideal  was   Proudhon's  mutualism,  the   association  of   workingmen without  state  intervention.  The  English  from  the   trade  unions, already   accustomed  to   their   national  associations  of   workingmen, dreamed  of   an   international  association  which,  by   extending  joint responsibility  among  the   workingmen  of   every  nation,  would

## 728       THE  INTERNATIONAL   REVOLUTIONARY  PARTIES.

hinder  employers  from  opposing  workmen  of   one  country  to those  of   another.

They  complained  that,  to   break  down  strikes,  English  employers resorted  to   foreign   labourers.  There  was  no  plan   as  yet for   anything  more  than  a   professional  association  without  political aim.

A   final   meeting   in   London,  September  28,   1864,   appointed  a committee  of   50   members  to   draw  up   the   statutes  for   an  association. The   former  revolutionists  presented  schemes:  Mazzini one   for   a   strongly   centralized  organization,  Marx  one   for   a   federation. Mazzini's  plan   was  rejected,   as   it   did   not   seem  to   have been  designed  for   a  society  of   workingmen.  Marx'  plan   was adopted,  in   the   form  of   provisional  statutes,  in   1864.

The  International  Association  of   Labourers  was  organized  as  a federation.  The  members,  who  declared  themselves  faithful  to the   principles  of   the   association,  divided  into   self-governing  sections, each   having   its   committee.  The   subscription  was  very small,  almost  nominal.  The  Association  had  two  common organs :   the   Congress  of   delegates  from  the   sections,  meeting  once a   year   and   invested  with   sovereign  power,  and   the   General  Council, appointed   by   the   Congress.  The   Council  was  to   be   stationary in   London,  and   was  charged  with  the   preparation  of   business for   the   Congress  and   with  conducting  the   correspondence  with the   sections.  This  was  the   system  of   the   English  trade  societies, with  no  resemblance  to   the   former  revolutionary  secret  societies. No  professional  condition  was  required;  the   French  delegates' proposal  to   admit  only   manual  labourers  had   been  rejected.  In fact,   not  only   workingmen  joined  the  International,  but  also revolutionists  and  even  middle-class  philanthropists,  as,   for   instance, Jules   Simon.  The   avowed  object   was  to   establish  a   centre of   union  and   of   common  methodical  action  between  the   workingmen's  clubs  of   the   different  countries  which  aimed  at   the   protection, progress,  and   emancipation  of   the   labouring  classes.  It was  to   be   accomplished  now  only   by   peaceful  agreement.

The  "   International  "   gained   members  slowly.  The  first  congress could   not   be   held   until  1866,   at   Geneva,  where  definite statutes  were  adopted.  After  this   there  was  an  annual  congress, held  in   some  small  country,  usually   Switzerland;  and   Marx  took the   direction  of   the   General  Council,  making  it   the   real   power. The  International  at   once  assumed  the   character  of   a   political  society, becoming   more  and   more  revolutionary  at   each   congress.

The  Congress  of   1866,   at   Geneva,  confined  itself  to*   formulating

general  principles,*  but   it   was   here  that   Marx's  theory   of   class strife   first   appeared.  He   recommended  the  organization  of   an understanding  between  workingmen  against  the  intrigues  of capitalists,  and   an   investigation  into  the   condition  of   the   working classes   in   every   country ;   also   the   encouragement  of   co-operative production  and   workingmen's  syndicates.  He  demanded the   abolition  of   standing  armies.

The  Congress  of   1867,   at   Lausanne,  declared  "   that   the   social emancipation  of   the   labouring  man  is   inseparable  from  political emancipation  and  that  the   acquisition  of   political  liberty   is   a prime   necessity."  It   voted  that   the   state  should  assume  control of   transportation.

The  Congress  of   1868,   at   Brussels,  protested  against   war  and the   wages  system,  pronounced  itself  in   favour  of   the   international organization  of   strikes,  and   demanded  that  mines  and  quarries, forests  and   means  of   communication  should  be   made  common property.  On  the  land  question  it   expressed  the   opinion  that "   economic  evolution  will   make  the   taking   of   arable  soil   into   the collective  ownership  of   the   state  a   social  necessity."  The  International adopted   Marx'  collectivist  doctrine.

The  International  returned  to   the   communist  program  of   1848: to   unite  the   proletarians  of   every  nation  and   establish  collective ownership  of   implements  of   labour.  But  this   was  only   a   doctrine. No   exact  program  was   formulated  as   to   the   practical means  of   realizing  it;   and,   besides,  the   International  was  opposed to   the   use  of   force.  It   was  thought  to   be   rich,   like   the   trade unions;  the   workingmen  clung   to   it   to   get   support  in   case  of strikes,  and   they   had   a   chance  to   make  reluctant  employers  yield by   means  of   this   imaginary  aid.  The  members  did   not  pay,   however, and   the   treasury  remained  almost  empty.

The  Congress  of   1869,   at   Bale,   confirmed  the   resolutions  of 1868,   against   the   will   of   the   French,  who   upheld   individual  property rights.   It   declared  that   "   society   has   the   right   to   convert private   lands  into   collective  lands,   and   that   this   transformation  is necessary."

*   "   The   emancipation  of   the   labouring  class  must  be   accomplished  by   the labouring  class  itself.  .   .   The   economic  emancipation  of   the   labouring  class is   the   final   end   to   which  every  political  movement  must  be   subordinated as  a   means.  This  emancipation  is   neither  a   local  nor  national,  but   a social  problem,  which  includes  every  country  where  modern  society  exists, and  whose  solution  depends  on   the   common  action  of   the   most  advanced countries."

## 73°       THE  INTERNATIONAL  REVOLUTIONARY  PARTIES.

The  International  greatly  alarmed  the   governments  and  the employing  class.  In   France  the   committee  of   the   Paris  section was  first  prosecuted  (1867),  then  all   the   leaders  were  arrested (1870).  In   reality   it   acted  simply   as  a   society   for   the   propagation of   doctrine,  and   its   career  was  a   brief   one.  It   was  at   once attacked  from  without  and   disorganized  from  within.

The  war  of   1870   weakened  it   by   exciting  national  patriotism against  every   international  body;   the   protest  of   the   General Council  of   the   International  against   a   war  of   German  conquest, in   September,  1870,   passed   unnoticed.  The  war   brought  on  the Commune  of   Paris;  this   was  not  a   product  of   the   International, but  rather  a  reminiscence  of   1792;  even  the   small  minority  of internationalists  in   the   Commune  were  not  representatives  of   the International.  But  after  the   defeat,  Karl  Marx,  in   the   name  of the   General  Council  of   the   International,  issued  a  manifesto  in honour  of   the   Paris  of   the   labouring  men  and   the   martyrs  of   the labouring  classes.  The  International,  having   rendered  itself  conjointly responsible  with   the   Commune,  was  treated  as   insurrectionist. In   France  the   Assembly  passed   a   special   law   against   it in   1872;   in   England  the   workingmen  abandoned  it.   It   was  left almost  without  supporters,  except  in  Germany,  Belgium, Switzerland,  and  the   southern  countries. tionist.

Meanwhile  it   was  disorganized  by   an   internal  struggle.  A Russian  refugee  in   Switzerland,  Bakounine,  a  revolutionist  of '48,   now  an  anarchist,  had   joined   the   International  in   1868;   he had   just   founded  a   federative  society,   the   International  Alliance  of the   Social  Democracy,  under  the   direction  of   a   central  committee established  at   Geneva,  of   which  he   himself  was  the   head  (see   his program  on  p.   735).   Its   members  belonged  to   the   countries  of the   Romance  languages - Italy,   Spain,   Belgium,  and   the   Italian and  French  portions  of   Switzerland.  He   insisted  on   having  it join   the   International,  while  preserving  its   own  organization. The  General  Council  replied  that  sections  could  be   admitted,  but not  a   federation.  Bakounine  decided  to   dissolve  his   Alliance  and enter  the   sections  separately  into   the   International  (1869).  But the   federation  between  them  still   existed  secretly,  and   soon  came into   conflict  with   the   General  Council  of   the   International  on   the questions  of   a   congress  of   the   Romance  federation  in   1870,   and the   terrorist  propaganda  of   Netchajew  in   Russia  (see   p.   606). This   was  a   contest  between  two  revolutionary  leaders,  Bakounine and  Marx, - between  two  groups  of   people,  the   men  of   the   Romance languages,  attached  to   Bakounine,  and   the   men  of   the

North  supporting  Marx, - between  two  programs,  Marx'  collectivism and   Bakounine's  anarchism, - between  two  policies, Marx'  legal   political  action  and  Bakounine's  abstention  from the   polls   and   violent  revolution, - between  two  organizations: Marx  wished  to   strengthen  the   General  Council  for   the   general direction  of   the   International;  Bakounine  to   reduce  it   to   the   role of   a   "   letter  box,"   leaving   each  section  independent.

The   annual  Congres's  of   the   International  had   been  prevented in   1870   and   1871   by   the   war  and   the   prosecution  of   the   German socialists.  The   Congress  of   1872,   held   at   The   Hague,   had   to   decide between  the   two  rivals;   the   struggle  began   with  the   proposal made   by   Bakounine's  supporters  to   suppress  the   authority of   the   General  Council;  the   Marxist  majority  were  resolved,  on the   contrary,  that   the   Council  should  have   the   right   to   suspend  a section  or  even  a   federation.  They   voted  to   exclude  Bakounine and   the   former  members  of   the   Alliance  and   transfer  the   session of   the   Council  to   New   York.  The   Blanquists  withdrew  from  the International,  reproaching  it   with  deserting  the   field  of   battle; there  remained  only   the   English,  Germans,  and   Americans,  who held  one  more  congress,  in   1873   at   Geneva,  and   finally   declared the   association  dissolved  in   1876.

The  International  disappeared  without  having  accomplished any  positive  results.  Founded  to   secure  social  reforms  by   international agreement,   it   had   succeeded  only   in   alarming   the   governments and   the   public.   This   was  the   laist   attempt  at   international party   organization.

Formation  of   the   Socialist  Platform  in   Germany  (1863-75). While  the  International  was  trying  to  create  an   international party  of   social  revolution,  a  national  socialist  party   was   being formed  in   Germany,  with  a  platform  and  an  organization  which furnished  a   model  for   all   Europe.

The  Socialist  party  was  founded  by   Lassalle  (see   p.   479),   an old   revolutitionist  of   '48,   who   began   with   political   conferences  in connection  with  the   conflict  at   Berlin  (1862).  The   new  generation of   workingmen  were  ignorant  of   socialistic  theories,  but   they were  beginning  to   discuss  means  of   improving  their  condition. A   committee  was   formed  at   Leipzig  to   organize  a   workingmen's congress  in   which  to   discuss  their  interests.  This  committee consulted  Lassalle,  who  replied   with   an   "   open   letter,"   in   March, 1863.  He  urged   labouring  men  to   form  a  workingmen's  party independent  of   the   middle-class  parties,   in   order  to   gain   control of   political   power.   Their  aim   should  be   to   escape  the   " iron   law

of   wages,"  which  causes  the   wages  of   the   labourer  to   be   always reduced  by   competition  to   the   minimum  necessary  for   existence. Workingmen  can  rise  out  of   their  condition  neither  by   the   individual effort   which   the   economists  inculcate,  nor  even  by   private association  (co-operative  societies,  syndicates,  credit  societies); they   must  have  assistance  from  the   state.  The   practical  method is   to   create  clubs  of   productive  workmen  with  state  appropriations. But   to   secure  this   appropriation  they   must  gain   political control  and   as  a   first   condition  demand  universal  suffrage.  Lassalle  thus  revived  Louis  Blanc's  ideas,  universal  suffrage  and national  workshops.  He  also  revived  the  old  name  of   social democrat.  But  he   combined  the   socialistic  doctrines  of   '48   with the   theories  of   official  political  authority.  This  is   what  he   calls "   being   armed  with  all   the   science  of   the   epoch."  (The   "   iron law   of   wages   "   was  a   theory   of   the   liberal  economists,  first   formulated by   Turgot.)

Lassalle  at   first   won  the   workmen  of   the   manufacturing  regions of   the   Rhine,   and   the   Leipzig  Congress  created  the   "   General Union  of  German  Workingmen  "   (May,  1863).  This  was strongly  centralized  under  the   direction  of   a   president  elected  for five   years.   Lassalle,  elected  president,  went  to   Berlin  to   struggle against  the   progressist  party   and   entered  into   relations  with  Bismarck (see   p.   479).   After  his   death,   in   1864,   his   party   remained a   German  patriotic  party  at   once  monarchical  and  democratic, with  a   limited  socialist  program.

The  Marx  party  was  organized  later.  It   began   with  the   secession of   the   Germans  of   the   International  from  Lassalle's  national party,  which  was  accused  of   having  sold  itself  to   the   Prussian government.  It   was  formed  by   the   conversion  to   socialism  of the  societies  in   Saxony  (see   p.   479),   which  joined   the   International in   1868.

The  party  was  constituted  at   the   Eisenach  Congress  in   1869, where  the   first   complete  socialist  program  was  drawn  up.   The majority  (262   against  no)   belonged  to   Marx'  disciples;  it   reproduced his   doctrines  and   formulae.  Marx,  who  had   just   published his   system   in   the   first   volume  of   "   Capital   "   (1867),   proceeded  like Lassalle,  giving   to   his   socialist  doctrines  of   1848   the   form  of   a scientific  system.  His   theory   of   value  rested  on   the   official  doctrine of   1848   that   value  is   the   product   of   labour.  He   avoided  the sentimental  and   Utopian  allurements  of   the   former  socialists.  The doctrine  remained  otherwise  the   same  as   in   1848,   very   different from  the   old   Babouvist  communism,  which  imposed  a  sharing  of

goods   and   a   common  life.  Marx  limited  himself  to   making  the means  of   production  common  property.  Communism,  out  of favour  since  1848,   was  replaced  by   collectivism.

The   party   took   the   name  of   the   social  democratic  party   of   wor'kingmen,  the   old   name  of   '48.   The  platform  was  divided  into three  parts:  i.   the   object;   2.   the   principles  which  the   members promised  to   maintain;*  3.   the   immediate  practical  program.  The doctrine  is   that   of   the   manifesto  of   1848:   class   strife,   conquest  of political  power  to   attain  a   social  revolution,  international  understanding. The   immediate  program  is   that   of   the   radical  democratic party,f   with   the   addition  of   certain  social  reforms:  limitation of   the   working  day,   diminution  of   labour  for   women, prohibition  of   child  labour,  single   progressive  tax  on   income and   inheritance,  state  appropriations  to   associations  of   producers (this   last   article  to   win   Lassalle's  supporters). tation

The  organization  was  federative,  opposed  to   that  of   Lassalle. Bebel  declared  that   they   wished  to   prevent  "   faith  in   authority  " and  "   personal  creeds."  The  members  from  a  single   city   met without  forming  a  permanent  society  to   escape  the   laws  against associations,  and   chose  a   trustworthy  man  to   convoke  the   meetings and   collect  the   subscriptions.  Each  year   the   elected  delegates met   in   congress  to   regulate   general   affairs.  The   congress

## *i.  The  object  is   "the  creation  of   the  free  democratic  state" (  Volksstaat}.

The  principles  are  :   "The  existing  'social  and  political  conditions  are unjust  in   the  highest  degree,  and  should  be   fought  with  the  greatest energy.  The  struggle  for  the  emancipation  of   the  labouring  class  is   a struggle  .   .   .   for   equality  in   rights   and   duties  and   the   abolition  of   all class  domination.  .   .   The  party  seeks  in   abolishing  the   existing  system of   production  (the   wages  system)  to   secure  through  associated  labour  the full   product  of   his   toil   for   each  workman.  Political  liberty   is   the   most indispensable  condition  for   economic  emancipation  .  .  .   the   social  question .   .   .   can  be   resolved  only   in   a   democratic  state.  Political  and economic  emancipation  of   the   labouring  class  is   possible  only   if   it   fights   for it   in   common.  Emancipation  is   neither  local  nor  national,  but   a   social problem.  .   .   The  party  considers  itself  a   branch  of   the   International." f Universal  suffrage  at   21  years  of   age   in   all   elections  (universal  suffrage exists  in   Germany  only   for   the   Reichstag,  and   only   for   men  over  25   years of   age),- pay   for   representatives,- direct  legislation  (referendum), -abolition of   all   privileges  of   class,   property,  birth,   or   religion,- national  militia,separation  of   Church  and  state,- lay   school,  compulsory  in   the  primary degree   and   free   to   all,-  free   justice,   with   juries   and   oral   procedure, liberty  of   the   press,  of   meetings,  and  of   unions, - abolition  of   indirect taxes.

appointed  an  executive  committee  of   5   members  under  the   supervision of   a   controlling  committee  of   1 1   members,  the   two  residing in   two  different  cities.  There  was  a   party  organ,  supported by   subscription.

The   two   German  socialist  parties   held   separate  congresses,  presented separate  candidates,  and   fought   against   each  other  until 1875;   but   associations  being   prosecuted  and  dissolved  in   Prussia under  the   law   against  the   union  (Verband)  of   political  societies, they   united  in   one  party,  the   socialist  party   of   the   workingmen  of Germany.  Their  common  platform,  set  up   at   Gotha  in   1875,   mav be   divided  into   two  parts,  an  exposition  of   doctrine  and   a   program. The   doctrine  *   was  that   of   the   Marxist  program  of   1869, stated  precisely  and   combined  with  the   Lassalle  formulae,  without thought   for   the   contradictions  :   "   labour  the   sole   origin   of wealth  "   and   "   the   iron   law   of   wages," - "   creation  of   associations of   production  with  government  aid,"   and  "   emancipation  of   the labouring  classes  by   the   formation  of   a  political  workingmen's party," - the  "   international  character  of   the   movement  "   and "   action  within  national  lines."  f gram. out

The  program  is   in   two  parts:  i.   the   political  ideal,   "foundation of   the   state":  universal  suffrage,  direct  legislation,  militia; complete  liberty  of   the   press,  of   association  and   public   meeting, justice   by   the   people,   universal  and  gratuitous  education,  religion declared  a   private   matter  (this   is   the   democratic  program of   1869);   2.   immediate  social  reforms  (in   existing  society):  extension of   rights   in   the   idealistic  sense,  progressive  income  tax, freedom  of   coalition,  length   of   day   fixed  by   law,   interdiction  of child  labour,  laws  for   the   protection  of   the   workingman,  sanitary

*   Marx  wrote  his   partisans  a   violent  letter  against  this   conciliatory  program: it   was  not  made  public  until  1890,   in   the   Neue  Zeit.

f These  are  the   principal  passages.  "   Labour  is   the   source  of   all   wealth .  .   .   and   is   possible   only   through  society.  The  whole  product  of   labour therefore  belongs  to   society,  that  is,   to   all   its   members,  with  universal duty  of   labour  and  equal  rights;  to   each,  according  to   his   reasonable wants.  .  .   Emancipation  of   labour  demands  the  transformation  of   the means  of   labour  into  the  common  property  of   society,  the  corporative regulation  of   all   labour.  .   .   It   must  be   the   work  of   the   labouring  class, in   the   face  of   which  all   other  classes  are  only   a  reactionary  mass. The  party  .  .  .  will  try   all   legal   means  of   securing  a   free  state  and socialistic  society,  the   breaking  down  of   the  iron  law  of   wages  by   the abolition  of   the   wages  system  of   labour,  the   suppression  of   employment  in every   form,  the   disappearance  of   all   social  and  political  inequality.  The party  .  .  .   though  acting   primarily  within  national  lines,  is   conscious  of the   international  character  of   the   movement."

control  of   factories,  mines,   and   lodgings,  liability   of   the   employer, regulation  of   prison   labour.

The   organization  was   federative,  similar  to   that   of   the   Marxists in   1869:   local   self-governing  groups;  an  annual  congress  of   delegates, invested  with   sovereign  power ;   a   government  composed  of 3   organs - a   directory  (V   or   stand)   of   5   members,  a   board  of   control of   7   members  sitting   in   another  city,   a  commission  of   18 members  to   serve  as  arbiter  between  the   two;   a   party   publication and   a   fund.

The  doctrine  differed  little  from  the   manifesto  of   1848,   the organization  resembled  that  of   the   International.  Marx'  attempt, which  had  failed  under  the   name  of   communism  and  the   form of   an   international  society,   finally   succeeded  under  the   name  of collectivism  and  the   form  of   a  national  party.  The  creation  of this   party   in   Germany  was  an   international  event.  For   the   first time  in   a   great   state  a   socialist  workingmen's  party   was   formed, directed  by   a  permanent  organization, - a  central  government, an  annual  congress,  and   an  official  organ, - maintaining  a   regular budget,  working  in   the   name  of   a   definite  program,  at   once  doctrinal and   practical,   and   holding   a   permanent  place   among  political parties.   This   German  party   was  to   furnish  a   model  to   the socialists  of   other  countries;  as   it   preserved  the   international spirit   of   its   founder,  it   revived  by   example  and   propaganda  the work  the   International  had   failed  to   accomplish.

The  Anarchist  Parties. - The  words  anarchy  and   anarchist  were for   a   long   time   only   injurious  terms  applied   to   revolutionists  by their  enemies.  Proudhon  first  gave   the   name  of   anarchy  to   his system.  In   so   far   as  a   positive  formula  may   be   deduced  from his   works,  which  are  mainly   critical  and   controversial,  his   ideal was  a   federation  of   voluntary  associations  of   workingmen  and farmers  without  political  government.  Among  the   revolutionists between  1840   and   1848,   some  showed  a   similar  tendency,  but they   did   not   form   a   party   (Hess   and   Griin  in   Germany,  Marr   in Switzerland).

The  creator  of   the   anarchist  party   was   Bakounine,  a   Russian officer  and   militant  revolutionist  who  had   become  a   disciple  of Proudhon  during  his  stay   in   Paris  (1843-47).  He   took   from Proudhon  the   idea  of   anarchy  and   federation,  but   he   added  to   it hatred  of   civilized  institutions  and   systematic  calls   for   violence  to destroy  them.  He  declared  the  oppressed  classes  incapable  of emancipating  themselves;  if   they   should  reconstruct  a   new  society they   would   make   it   as  oppressive   as   the   old   one.   It   was

## 736       THE  INTERN  A   TIONAL  RE  VOL  UTIONAR  Y   PAR  TIES.

therefore  necessary  to   avoid  every  positive  creation  and  simply "unchain  all   the   so-called  evil   passions  and   destroy   all   of   what is   known  as  public   order."  The   tactics  must  consist  in   exciting riots.

The  Alliance  of   the   Social  Democracy  founded  by   Bakounine  in 1868  had   secret  statutes  and   an  anarchistic  program;  it   demanded not  only   full   equality   for   all   and   collective  ownership  of   land   and the  implements  of   labour,  but  "   universal  revolution - social, philosophic,  economic,  and  political."  Its   aim  was  to   destroy all   the   governments  and   all   the   churches,  together  with  their  religious, political,   financial,   judicial,   police,   university,  economic, and   social  institutions."

Few  in   number  and  sharply  combated  by   the  socialists,  the anarchists  gained  almost  no  members  except  in   the   countries where  the   socialist  party   had   not  yet   been  organized.  They   did, however,  acquire  a  political  influence  disproportionate  to   their numbers  by   adopting  the   methods  of   the   Russian  terrorists - the commission  of   murder  and  outrage  by   means  of   explosives. This  method  they   exalted  into  a   theory,  which  has   given   them universal  notoriety.  The  revolutionary  parties  had  heretofore employed  acts  of   violence  only   to   produce  a   decisive  effect  by   destroying some  objectionable  individual.  The   anarchists  valued acts  of   violence  as  a  means  of   publicity,  committing  them  in order  to   attract  the   attention  of   the   public   to   the   vices  of   society and   force  it   to   reflect.  This   was  propagation  by   facts.

In   1869   the   Alliance  joined   the   International,  then   left   it   with Bakounine  in   1872.  It   was  composed  of   revolutionists  of   the Romanic  countries,  the   most  unruly   and   violent  members  of   the International,  the   Italian  section,  the   Spanish  section  that   took part   in   the   cantonalist  insurrections  (see   p.   313),   a   Belgian   section, and   the   Jura   Federation,  recruited  among  the   clock-makers in   the   canton  of   Neuchatel,  a   small  but   very  active  section.  It held  congresses  in   1872,   '73,   '74,   '76,   and   '77.

The  anarchist  party,   by   the   very  nature  of   its   policy,   was unable  to   make  itself  a   permanent  party.   As   soon  as  an  active group  was  formed  in   a   country,  it   made  itself  conspicuous  by   its actions,  and  was  quickly  exterminated.  There  remained  only the   anarchist  writers,  whom  the   governments  tolerated  and  surrounded with   spies.   In   addition  to   this,   the   majority   of   anarchists, both   by   temperament  and  doctrine,  refused  to   recognise even  voluntary  authority.  They   formed  "   groups   "   of   "   comrades "   rather  than  parties  and  did   not  work  in   harmony.  In

fact   their   political   influence  was   limited  to   the   reactions  brought on   by   their   propaganda  of   outrage,  and   their  history   was  nothing but   a   recital   of   individual  demonstrations  in   different  countries.

The  remnants  of   the   Alliance  and   the   Paris  "   group   "   held   at London  in   1881   a   congress  which  declared  it   "   necessary  to   use all   possible  means  to   spread   actively   revolutionary  ideas  and   the spirit   of   revolt   among  the   masses,  who   as  yet   take   no  active  part in   the   movement  and   delude  themselves  on  the  morality  and efficacy  of   legal   methods."  It   recommended  the  study  of chemistry,  "   which  has   already   rendered  great   service  to   the   revolutionary cause."

An   anarchist  movement  was  made  in   France  from  1872   to 1882,   in   the   southeast  and   in   Paris.  It   was  chiefly   noticeable for   the   doctrinal  teachings  of   two  writers,  Kropotkin  and  E. Reclus,  and   for   the   Lyons   explosion,  followed  by   prompt  repression (1882).

The  anarchist  movement  produced  in   Austria  by   Most  and Peukert  (1882-85)  was  crushed  by   special  laws  and  arrests  en masse.  The  last   anarchist  movements  were  produced  at   Paris from  1892   to   1894,   in   Italy,   and   in   Spain.   In   the   German  countries the   movement  was  checked  by   the   socialist  party.   In   England, London  served  as  a   refuge   for   foreign   anarchists,  but   no anarchistic  acts  were  perpetrated  there.

Formation  of   the   National  Socialist  Parties. - The  German  socialists, in   order  to   gain   the   political  power  necessary  for   social revolution,  had   provisionally  renounced  the   international  organization and   had   constituted  themselves  as  a   national  party   with   an electoral  and   parliamentary  organization.

The  other  countries  have  gradually  imitated  them.  Evolution was  at   first   retarded  by   the   anarchists'  resistance  to&gt;   the   Alliance, then  by   internal  divisions  among  the   socialists,  and   the   repressive measures  taken  by   the   governments.  But  almost  everywhere  a socialist  workingmen's  party   has   been  formed  on  the   model  of the   German  party  and   with  a   similar  program.  In   Austria,  after the   destruction  of   the   anarchists,  the   "   social  democratic  workingmen's  party   "   was  constituted  in   1888,   with  an   international  * collectivist  program  and  an  organization  composed  as   in   Germany of   a   congress,  a   directory,  and   a   board  of   control.  It   has

*"The  party  .  .  .   is   an   international  party;   it   condemns  the  privilege of   nations,  as  well  as   those  of   birth,   sex,  and   property,  and   declares that  the   struggle  against  exploitation  must  be   international  like   exploitation itself." 47

## 738       THE  INTERNATIONAL  REVOLUTIONARY  PARTIES.

especially  made  demonstrations  in   favour  of   universal  suffrage and  the   eight-hour  day.   In   the   three  Scandinavian  countries, Holland,  and  Belgium,  the   party   has   been  constructed  after  the German  model.  In  Poland  the  party,  formed  in   1882  in   the manufacturing  cities  of   Russian  Poland,  was  crushed  in   1885. It   was  revived  in   1892-93  with  a  collectivist  platform  copied from  Germany ; but   this   is   a   party   of   Polish  patriots   who   demand the  reconstitution  of   Poland  as  a   democratic  republic.  In France  and  the  Romanic  countries  the  collectivist  ideas  have gradually  permeated  all   the   revolutionary  parties;  but   they   have not  adopted  a   regular   organization  and   a   central  management.

The  German  party,  obliged  to   dissolve  its   official  organization and  to   hold  its   congresses  abroad  (see   p.   479)   while  the   special laws  were  in   force  (1878-90),  took  advantage  of   the   return  to ordinary  law  to  reorganize.  It   took  the  name  of   the  social democratic  party  (1890),  restored  the  organization  by   local groups  (ordinarily  constituted  in   the  form  of   electoral  committees), and   decided   to   push   socialist  propagandism  in   the   rural districts.  The  Congress  of   Erfurt,  in   1891,   revised  the   program, suppressing  the   passages  which  recalled  Lassalle's  doctrine  and developing  much  more  broadly  Marx'  theory  that  natural  evolution will   do   away   with   private   property  and   prepare   for   collectivism. The   party   set   itself   the   task   of   organizing  class   struggles by   arousing  the   workingmen  to   the   necessity  of   contest.  To   this main  object   they   have  added  emancipation  of   women,  free  medical care,   and   free   burials.  In   labour  legislation  they   demand  extension to   farm  labourers  and   domestic  servants  of   the   measures taken  for   the   factory   operatives. ism.

Thus  in   the   majority  of   the   European  states  socialist  parties have  been  created,  with  a   democratic  constitution,  composed  of two  organs :   an  annual  congress  of   elected  representatives,  a   sovereign deliberative  assembly  which  determines  the   program  and general  policy;  a  permanent  committee  chosen  by   the   congress and   charged  with  the   executive  functions.  It   is   a   complete  government provided   with   the   means  of   practical   action:  a   fund,   an organ,  and  an  electoral  organization.  Each  party   is   constituted within  the   lines  of   a   single   nation,  since  it   has   to   act   through   a single   parliament.  There  are,   indeed,  in   some  countries  several rival   socialist  parties.

The  socialist  doctrine  rests  on   the   same  principles  everywhere. The  existing  economic  system  is   unfavourable  to  the   labouring class ; the   reform  must  be   the   work  of   the   labouring  class ; it   will

be   accomplished  by   gaining  political  control  and   employing  the power  of   the   state  to   establish  the   collective  ownership  of   instruments of   production,  including  the   soil.

The  practical  reforms  aimed  at   are  political  and   social.  Their political  program  is   the   former  radical  democratic  program, pushed  to   the   farthest  logical   consequences:  absolute  equality, meaning  universal  suffrage,  even  for  women;  equal  military service;  complete  instruction  for   all;   absolute  liberty,  meaning liberty   of   the   press,  of   public   meeting   and   association;  the   complete separation   of   Church  and   state;  complete  laicization;  absolute fraternity,  meaning  general  peace,   disarmament,  no  more distinction  between  natives  and   foreigners,  international  regulation of   all   common  affairs.

The  socialist  party  takes  the   title  democratic;  it   is   from  the democratic  parties  that   it   draws  its   members,  it   is   from  the   democratic doctrine  as   a   starting-point  that   it   goes  on   to   demand  a social  revolution.  In   Germany  and   Austria,  it   holds  the   position of   radical  party.   In   the   countries  with   restricted  suffrage,  Austria, the   Scandinavian  states,   Holland,  and   Italy,   it   demands  universal suffrage,   as   the   socialists  demanded  it   in   France  prior   to 1848,   in   Germany  prior   to   1866,   and   in   Belgium  prior   to   1893.

The  socialist  program  aims  at   practical  reforms  in   detail  to   improve the   condition  of   the   labouring  classes  (syndicates,  legislation in   favour  of   the   workingman,  regulation  of   wages  and   the length   of   the   working  day,   superannuation  fund),   and   measures to   begin   economic  transformation  in   the   collectivist  sense  (socialization of   railroads,  mines,  and  insurance,  progressive  income tax).   The  program  also   keeps   in   view  the   ultimate  goal   of   complete collectivism,  as   an   aim   to   be   realized  in   the   future.

Altogether  it   is   a   political,  democratic,  levelling,  liberal,  lay, pacific,   democratic  program,  joined   to   a  program  of   eventual state  socialism,  working  through  legislation  and   taxation.  Of these  two   independent  programs  it   is   difficult  to   determine  which attracts  the   more  members  to   the   socialist  parties.

Policy  of   the   Revolutionary  Parties, - During  the   first   half   of the   century  revolutionary  parties   knew  no  means  of   action  but violent  revolution,  such  as   Mazzini's  conspiracies  in   Italy   and Blanqui's  insurrectional  uprisings  in   France.  All   their   successes in   that   period   were   due   to   revolt,   in   the   army  or   in   the   capital.

In   the   second  half   of   the   century  the   governments  being   better armed  (see   p.   674),   the   revolutionists  have  conceived  a   different policy,   namely,  peaceful   propagandism  to   attain  legal   acquisition

## 740      THE  INTERNATIONAL  REVOLUTIONARY  PARTIES.

of   power.  The  association  founded  by   Lassalle  declared  in   its statutes  in   1863   that  its   object   was  to   work  by   "   peaceful  and legal   means,"  by   winning  public   favour.  The  Marxist  socialist party,  even  while  announcing  their  purpose  of   establishing  the dictatorship  of   the   proletariat,  made  it   a   rule   to   avoid  outbreaks. The  doctrine  of   natural  evolution  toward  the   collectivist  system, inculcated  among  the  socialists  by   Marx,  turned  them  from sudden  revolution,  which  was  useless  as   it   was  premature and  dangerous  because  it   might  cause  the  destruction  of   the party.  The  Gotha  program  of   1875   declared  that   the   party  was acting   "   by   all   legal   means,"  and   this   clause  was  suppressed  in 1880  only   in   response  to   the   special   law   of   1878,   which  made even  the   propagation  of   socialistic  doctrines  illegal.

What  policy   must  it   adopt   to   prepare  the   way   for   social  revolution? This   is   the   question  that   has   dominated  the   policy   of   the revolutionary  parties,  that  has  caused  almost  all   their  internal discord,  their  ruptures  and   division  into  groups.

The  radical  democratic  party   has   lost   all   revolutionary  character, except   in   Russia,   and   has   become  a   parliamentary  party.   It proceeds  by   proposing  reforms  in   detail  through  legislation  and by   endeavouring  to   gain   a   parliamentary  majority  and   thereby the   ministry.

Certain  socialist  revolutionary  parties  have  also  detached themselves,  at   the   other  extreme - notably,  the   anarchist  party. In   the   negative  criticism  of   society   the   anarchists  agree  with   the socialists;  they   long   talked  the   same  language  and  worked  in harmony,  and  the  public  continues  to  confound  them  together as  equally  hostile  to  existing  social  order.  But  difference  in temperament  has   led   them  to   radically  different  policies.  Common action   has   now   become  impossible;  an   irreconcilable  enmity has   arisen  between  them.

The  anarchists,  unwilling  to   bind  themselves  to  a  party   discipline in   order  to   prepare  a  revolution  which  would  not   bring absolute  liberty   to   the   individual,  refused  to   join   in   any   political action,   scorned  elections  and   assemblies  and   recommended  violent action  to   rouse  public   opinion.  Those  of   them  who  wished  to act,   employed  the   criminal  tactics  of   the   Russian  terrorists.  The German  socialists  expressly  condemned  these  methods  in   1887.*

*   "   Force  is   a   factor  as  reactionary  as  revolutionary,  and   even  more  often the   former  than  the   latter.  The  policy   of   the   individual  use  of   force  does not  accomplish  its   object;  and,   wounding  as   it   does  the  sense  of   popular rights,   it   is   positively  injurious,  and   therefore  to   be   condemned."

The  socialists  have  taken  a   stand  halfway  between  the   radical democrats  and   the   anarchists,  thus  avoiding  both  purely   parliamentary action   and   violent  action.  But   this   general   principle, variously  interpreted,  has   led   to   various  tactics:  of   these  at   least three  may   be   distinguished - two  extreme,  leading  the   one  toward radical,   the   other   toward  anarchistic  methods;  the   third,   a sort  of   mean  between  these  two.

1.   The   official  policy   of   the   German  Marxist  parties   has   consisted in   the   adoption  of   the   forms  of   parliamentary  political  parties, but   only   as   a   means  of   spreading   socialistic  doctrines.     The party  presents  candidates  at   the   elections,  sends  deputies  to   the political    assemblies,    and   organizes    them    in     a    parliamentary group;  but   in   entering  the   electoral  and   parliamentary  arena  of middle-class  society,  it   declares  that   it   does   not  count  on  elections or  assemblies  to   bring   about  social  reform.     It   sees   in   them  only a   means  of   publishing  its   ideas,   of   agitating  public   opinion,  of gaining  adherents,  of   organizing  them  and   counting  them,   caring more  for   the   total   number  of   socialist  votes  than   for   the   number of   deputies  elected.       It   regards   assemblies  as  a   platform  from which  to   set   forth   its   doctrines,  refuses  to   take   part   in   parliamentary work   by   proposing  slight   social  reforms,  and   avoids  relations with  other  parties.     But  it   recommends  abstention  from  any revolutionary  movement  which  might  give   the  government  a pretext  for   crushing  the   party.      This  is   a   policy   of   revolutionary agitation  by   parliamentary  processes,  the   object   of   which  is   a peaceful  realization  of   a   complete  revolution.

2.   On   the   left,   making   the   transition  toward  anarchy,  comes the   policy   of   revolutionary  abstention  destined  to   prepare  a   sudden revolution.     It   consists  in   avoiding  contact  with  electoral and  parliamentary  life   which  would  involve  compromises,  cause principles  to   be   forgotten  and   revolutionists  to   mingle   with   society by   accustoming  them  to  that  of   the   middle  class.     The party  must  therefore  abstain  from  every  regular  political  act   and hold  itself  ready   for   revolution.     As   to   the   means  of   bringing about  the   revolution  opinions  diverge :   the   Blanquists  have  clung to   the   old   policy   of   civil   war,  which  becomes  more  and   more   impracticable; others   prefer   economic  war,  a   general   strike.      This is   a   policy   of   extra-parliamentary  agitation,  looking  forward  to a   complete  revolution  by   force.

3.   On   the   right,   making  the   transition  toward  the   political radicals,  has   appeared  more  recently  a   group  advocating  a   policy of   gradual   progress  and   of   compromise.     While  waiting   for   the

## 742      THE  INTERNATIONAL   REVOLUTIONARY  PARTIES,

chance  to   realize  the   Whole  ideal,   this   group   is   willing   to   realize fragments  of   it   in   the   form  of   laws.  It   is   therefore  willing   to enter  into   parliamentary  life,   to   make  terms  with  parties   hostile to   social  revolution,  and   induce  them  to   accept  partial   social  reforms. To   attract  voters,   it   has   begun   to   present  programs reduced  to   certain  practical  reforms  without  doctrinal  character. In   order  to   reassure  rural  voters,   in   particular,  it   has   come  to abandon  the  principle  of   collectivism  of   all   instruments  of   production. It   would  admit  small  individual  ownership  for  the peasant  who  cultivates  his   land  himself.  This  is   a   policy   of   parliamentary action   with   a   view   to   a   gradual   social   reform.

The  socialist  parties   have  had   to   choose  between  these  policies, and   that   which  each  has   adopted  has   determined  its   general  attitude in   political  life:   abstention,  entrance  into   politics   as  a   means of   agitation,  entrance  into  politics  in   contact  with  non-socialist parties.  Altogether  they   have  tended  to   gravitate  from  the   policy of   the   Left   to   that   of   the   Right,   passing   through   the   intermediate stage  of   primitive  Marxism;  but  the  parties  of   the  different policies  have  been  preserved  in   each  country,  and  remain rivals.

The  policy  of   semi-anarchistic  revolutionary  abstention  has been  that  of   the   old   parties,   small  in   numbers,  who   can   hope   for nothing  except  through  a  surprise;  its   supporters  have  been  reduced to   petty   groups,  impatient  at   delay   or   dissatisfied  with   the conduct  of   socialist  representatives  forced  to   mingle   with  other members  of   parliament.  This  is   the   attitude  of   certain  French groups,  Blanquists  and   Allemanists;  *   of   a   fraction  of   the   Dutch socialist  party,  and  of   a  small  Berlin  group  of   Independents  or Striplings,  as   they   were  called,   who   accused  the   party   leaders  of having  killed  the   revolutionary  spirit   and   made  the   socialist  party a   mere  reform  party.  This  group  was  expelled  by   the   Congress of   1891.

The  Marxist  policy   was  that  of   a   doctrinaire  party,  confident of   ultimate  triumph  and   fearing  to*   retard  it   by   any   imprudence, but   reproached  by   all   other  parties   and   replying  to   their  scorn with  violent  language  and  systematic  abstention  from  parliamentary action.  The   system   of   special   laws   prolonged  this   attitude in   Germany.  But  since  the  abandonment  of   special  laws, the   German  party,  while  fully   retaining  the   principle  of   its   tradi-

*   A   fusion  with  the   anarchists  was  attempted,  under  the   name  of   libertyloving   communism.

tional  policy,  has   inclined  toward  the   policy  of   the   socialist Right*

The   policy   of   gradual  reform  had,   in   1882,   been  adopted  by the   majority  of   the   labouring  men's  party,  which  led   to  the rupture  between  the   possibilists  and   the   Orthodox  Marxist  group (see   p.   217).   Since   the   official  reconciliation  of   1893   it   has   been the   prevailing  policy.  It   has   succeeded  in   forming,  under  the name  of   radical  socialists,  a   group  which  makes  a   connecting  link between  the   socialists  and   the   main  body   of   the   republican  party. It   showed  itself  at   the   Congress  of   Nantes  in   1894,   by   the adoption  of   a   program  of   land  reforms  destined  to   attract  the peasants  by   assuring  to   them  the   preservation  of   peasant  properties, and   enrolling   them   against   "   the   common  enemy,  the   feudalism of   large   land-holding."  This  is   also  the   policy   of   the English  Fabians  S-ociety.  The  Belgian  socialists  have  in   like manner  entered  into  relations  with  the   progressist  party.  In Germany,  this   policy   has   been  discussed,  since  1891,   in   the   party congresses.  Vollmar,  leader  of   the   Bavarian  socialists,  wished in   1891   to   discuss  in   the   Reichstag   bills   drawn  up   in   the   interest of   the   labouring  man.  The  leaders  of   the   party,   Bebel  and Liebknecht,  opposed  this  in   the   name  of   maintaining  a  class struggle  against  the   ruling   classes  and   the   state.  By' abandoning this   struggle   for   the   sake   of   a   single   practical   aim,   it   would become  a  mere  party  of   opportunity.  The  Congress  avoided committing  itself.  The   South  German  socialists  adopted  a   policy similar  to   that   of   the   French  radical  socialists;  their   deputies  to the   Bavarian  Landtag  refused  to   reject   the   budget   in   the   lump (1894).  'In   the   same  year   the   Frankfort  Congress  decided  to leave  the   socialists  in   each   state   free   to   choose  their   own  policy. A   plan   for   land   reform,   designed   to   attract  the   peasants,  was  rejected by   the   Congress   of   1895;   but   the   Bavarian  socialists  continued to   agitate   in   this   direction  and   the   Halle   Congress  of   1896 again   discussed  this  policy   without  reaching  a   definite  conclusion.

The  International  Socialist  Congresses. - Since  the   dissolution of   the   International  the   national  socialist  parties   have   attempted to   maintain  the   international  understanding  by   congresses  in

*"  While  the  conquest  of   political  power  cannot  be   the   work  of   a moment,  nor  the  outcome  of   a  momentarily  successful  surprise,  but   can be   secured  only   by   persistent  labour  and  by   skilful  use  of   all   means  of spreading  our   ideas,- resolved  that  there  is   no  reason  to   alter   the   policy of   the   party."

## 744       THE  INTERNAl^IONAL  REVOLUTIONARY  PARTIES.

which  a   program  of   social  reforms  of   general  interest  is   theoretically discussed.  But   the   practical  question  that   dominates  the deliberations  is   to   decide  on  what  conditions  the   delegates  may be   admitted  to   sit   in   the   Congress,  that   is,   whether  delegates  from the   anarchist  groups  should  be   refused  or  admitted.  This  is   the ground  of   dispute   between  the   semi-anarchistic  socialists  and   the "   authoritarians  "   or   Marxists.

The  Congress  of   1881,   whose  meeting  at   Zurich  was  prevented by   the   government,  was  reduced  to  the   Conference  of   Coire, which  was  not   large   enough  to   take  action.  The  meetings  of 1883   and  1886  were  reduced  to  conferences  held  at   Paris  by French  Possibilists  and   English  delegates  from  the   trade  unions ; the   Marxists  refused  to   consider  them  real  congresses.

The  first  Congress,  at   Ghent  in   1877,   was  a  victory   for   the "   authoritarians."  The  anarchists  had  been  admitted  to   it,   and another  attempt  at   conciliation  was  made.  The  organization  of production  was  discussed;  the  anarchists  proposed  their  ideal of   free   productive  groups  keeping  in   harmony  with  each  other by   force  of   common  interest  without  any   higher  power  over them.  The  Authoritarians  carried  the  principle  that  the  state, representative  of   the   whole  people,  "   should  own  the   land  and the  instruments  of   labour."  They   also  pronounced  labourunions  "   one  of   the   most  efficacious  means  in   the   struggle  of labourers  against  being   exploited  by   capitalists."

The  division  of   French  socialists  was  shown  by   the   two  congresses held   at   Paris   on   the   same  day,   July   14,   1889.   One, convoked  by   the   Possibilists  and  chiefly  French  (524   French delegates  out  of   606),   demanded  "   complete  education,"  minimum wage,  and   workshops  supported  by   the   government.  The other,  that  of   the   Marxists  (221   French  delegates  out  of   395), voted  the  Marxist  doctrine,  equal   pay   for   women,  liberty  of coalition,  resolutions  in   favour  of   the   eight-hour  day,   prohibition of   labour  of   children  and   women,  prohibition  of   unhealthy  and night   labour,  rest  of   thirty-six  consecutive  hours  each  week, suppression  of   employment  offices  and  employers'  bureaus,  and the   creation  of   factory   boards  of   inspection,  composed  one-half of   workingmen.  It   invited  the   proletarians  of   all   nations  to   organize an   international  demonstration  for   the   eight-hour  day,   on the   Labour  festival  of   May   I.   It   condemned  standing  armies and   made  a   demonstration  at   the   graves  of   the   "   martyrs  of   the Commune."

The  Congress  of   Brussels,  in   1891,   demanded,  for   admission,

that   delegates  should  declare  their  recognition  of   "   the   necessity of   political   struggle,"  which  shut   out  the   anarchists.  It   congratulated itself   on   the   influence  exercised  by   the   Congress   of   1889, which  had   caused  Emperor  William  to  call  together  the   international conference  of   1890   to   consider  labour  legislation.  It complained  that   the   laws   for   the   protection  of   the   labouring  man were  ill   applied,  decided  upon  an   investigation  of   the   conditions of   the   labouring  class,   and   invited  the   labourers  of   the   whole world  to   use  their  political  rights   to   free   themselves  from  the bondage  of   the   wage  system.  It   refused  even  to   discuss  antiSemitism,  resting  on  the   principle  of   all   socialist  parties,  who "   do   not   recognise  any   antipathies  of   nations  or  races,   but   only a   struggle  of   the   wage-earning  class  of   all   countries  against   the capitalist  class   of   all   countries."  It   undertook  to   organize  itself in   syndicates  to   direct  the   struggle.  The  Marxist  majority  rejected the   proposition,  made  by   Domela  Niewenhuis,  to   reply, in   case  of   a   declaration  of   war,   by   a   general   strike.

The  Congress  of   Zurich  in   1893   (440   delegates)  excluded  the anarchists,  who  demanded  admission  because  their  methods  also constituted  a   form  of   political  influence.  It   passed   resolutions regarding  the   festival  of   May   I,   the   eight-hour  day,   the   political tactics  of   the   socialists,  the   organization  of   syndicates,  and   the attitude  to   be   taken  in   case  of   war.  It   rejected   the   general   strike and  confined  itself  to   inviting  the   socialist  deputies  to   vote against  any  war  budget  and  to   demand  disarmament.  In   order to   cut   short  attempts  at   agrarian  conciliation,  it   voted  the   principle of   the   collective  ownership  of   the   soil.

The  Congress  of   London  in   1896   (800   delegates)  excluded  the anarchists;  the  minority,  which  had  voted  to  admit  them  (144 votes  against   223),   was  a   coalition  of   the   opponents  of   the   Marxists, chiefly   English   and   French.  The   Congress  voted  resolutions in   favour  of   universal  suffrage,  the   referendum,  emancipation of   women,  nationalization  of   railroads,  mines,  and   factories, and  abolition  of   customs  duties;  against  standing  armies  and colonial  expansion.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.- Stammhammer,  "   Bibliographic  des  Sozialismus," 1895,   in   alphabetical  order.  It   is   more  practicable  to   have  recourse  to the  bibl.  of   the  "   Handworterbuch  der  Staatswissenschaften,"  6   vols., 1890-94,  and  Suppl.,  1895,   under  the   words  Anarchismus,  Sozialdemokratie, Internationale,  and  names  of   the   persons  concerned.

DOCUMENTS.- The  principal  documents,  beside  the   writings  of   heads

## 746       THE  INTERNATIONAL   REVOLUTIONARY  PARTIES.

of   revolutionary  schools  and  parties,  are  chiefly   reports  of   party  meetings published  in   the  party  organs  or   in   special  pamphlets  (for   Germany, the  Vorvudrts  catalogue),  which  it   would  be   impossible  to   enumerate  (see the  bibl.  of   G.   Adler,  articles  on   Sozialdemokratie,  mentioned  above). The  most  important  periodicals  are  the  Vorvudrts,  the  Sozialdemokrat, the  "   Jahrbuch  fur   Sozialwissenschaft  u.   Sozialpolitik,"  which  lasted  two years,  1879-81,  and  Die  Neue  Zeit ;   in   France  the  Revue  Socialiste.

For  the  socialist  parties,  full  histories  .are   books  for  the  people: Laveleye,  "   Le   Socialisme  Contemporain,"  loth  ed.,   1896;  clear  and  instructive (original   details  on   the   southern  countries). - B.   Malon,   "   Hist,  du Socialisme,"  5   vols.,   1880-85,  uncritical  compilation,  but   may   be   found  useful.- Stegemann  and  Hugo,  "   Handbuch  des  Sozialismus,"  1894-95, socialistic,  in   dictionary  form,   gives   a   great   mass  of   information,  but  unfortunately no   references.

WORKS. - For  revolutionary  movements  other  than  socialistic: Deschamps,  "   Les   Societes  Secretes  et   la   Revolution,"  2  vols.,   3d   ed.,   1880; Claudio  Jannet,  vol.  iii.,   sub-titled  "Notes  et   Documents,"  s.   d.   (1883),  a confused,  passionate,  and  uncritical  work,  based  on   documents  and  previous works  on   Free  Masonry,  Carbonarism,  Mazzini,  etc.  The  chief works  are:  Diamilla-Muller,  "   Politica  Segreta  Italiana,"  1880;  Menacci, "   Memorie  Docum.  p.   la   Storia  della  Revol.  Ital.,"  1879   ;   Th.   Frost,   "   The Secret  Societies  of   the   European  Revolution,"  2   vols.,   1876.

On  the  period  preceding  1848:  Stein,"  Gesch.  der  Sozialen  Bewegung in   Frankreich,"  3   vols.,   1850   (a   revision  of   "   Sozialismus  und  Communismus  des  Heutigen  Frankreichs,"  2   vols.,  1848),   is   so   far   the   most  complete work  for   France.- 0.   Adler,  "   Gesch.  der   ersten  Sozialpolitischen  Arbeiterbewegung  in   Deutschland,"  1885,   for   Germany.

On   the   International  and  the   foundation  of   the   German  parties,  in   addition to   the   biographies  of   Lassalle  and  Marx  (mentioned  in   the  "   Handworterbuch  des  Staatswissenschaft."),  the  chief  history  is:  K.   Meyer, "   Der  Emancipationskampf  des  Vierten  Standes,"  2  vols.,  1874-75 (socialistic  conservative).

On  the   recent  period   :   Zacher,  "   L'International  Rouge,"  1885.- Winterer, "   Le   Socialisme  International,"  1890. - J.   Bourdeau,  "   Le   Socialisme  Allemand  et   le   Nihilisme  Russe,"  1892   (popular  edit.).- Wyzewa,  "   Le   Mouvement  Socialiste  en   Europe,"  1892   (popular  edit.).

On   anarchy,  no  complete  history:  G.   Adler,  art.   Anarchismus,  mentioned above,  1890   and   1895,   gives   a   review  and   a   detailed  bibl. - E.   Zenker,  "   Der Anarchismus,"  1895.

For  socialist  doctrines,  the  "   Handworterbuch  der  Staatswiss."  gives, under  the   name  of   each  author,  the   bibl.  of   his   works  in   great   detail,  and a   very  accurate  resumt  of   his   theories.  The  best  full  expositions  of   the socialist  ideal  are:  Schaeffle,  "   Quintessenz  des  Sozialismus,"  1875,  Fr. trans.,  1886;  and  especially  A.   Menger,  "Das  Recht  auf  den  Vollen  Arbeitsertrag,"  1886,  2d   ed.,   1891,   a   masterpiece  of   logic   and   clearness.

For  the   history  of   socialist  parties   in   each  country  see  the   bibliog.  of   the different  countries.

## CHAPTER   XXV.

## EUROPE    UNDER    THE    METTERNICH     SYSTEM,* 1815-30.

European  Questions  in   1815.- The  great  powers  had,   in   1814 and   1815,   regulated  the   whole  organization  of   Europe,  the   division of   territory,  and  even  the  internal  government  (see chap,   i.),   and   had   agreed   together   to   maintain  this   regulation. Europe  of   "   the   treaties  of   1815   "   rested  on  a   permanent  alliance of   five   great   states,   designed   to   defend  the   European  balance  of power  and   the   legitimate  monarchies,  that  is,   to   prevent  the   return of   the   revolutionary  governments  and  the   French  wars  of conquest.

All   these   states  were  aristocratic  monarchies:  three  absolutist, Russia,  Austria,  and   Prussia  ;   the   other  two  constitutional,  England and   France,   but   with   executive  governments  that   were  masters of   foreign  policy.  All   decisions  depended,  therefore,  on  a very  small  number  of   men,  the   sovereigns  and  their  ministers; the   personal  sentiments,  impressions,  and  wills  of   these  few   decided the   fate   of   Europe.   All   were  not  actually   of   the   same weight.  The  King   of   France  and  his   ministers,  absorbed  by domestic  affairs  and  dominated  by   the   necessity  of   peace;  the English  statesmen  of   the   Tory   party,  advocates  of   the   status  quo and   indifferent  to   continental  affairs;  the   King   of   Prussia,  timid, hesitating,  docile  to  the   counsels  of   Metternich,  all   desired  to

*   In   these  last   chapters  (xxv.-xxviii.)  on   the   relations  between  the   states, I   have  deliberately  broken  away   from  the  traditional  custom  of   introducing into   political   history   the   recital  of   the   details  of   war  and   diplomatic negotiations.  These  details,  indispensable  to   technical  histories  of the   art   of   war  and   diplomacy  written  for   specialists,  generals,  and   diplomatists, have   seemed  to   me  out   of   place   in   a   general   history;   they   are  no aid   to   the   understanding  of   political  evolution.  I   relate  here,   in   regard   to diplomatic  and  military  events,  only   what  is   strictly  necessary  to   explain how  questions  of   foreign  policy   have  arisen,  in   what  form  and   by   what means  they   have  been  settled.  The  wars  which  have  had   a   direct  effect upon   internal  policy   have  been  already  described  in   the   history  of   each country;  there  remain  here  only   international  events. matic

## 748           EUROPE    UNDER    THE  METTERNICH   SYSTEM.

avoid  foreign  complications  and  pursued  only   a  passive  policy. The  only   governments  capable  of   taking  the   initiative  and   able to   impose   a   policy   on   the   others  were  the   two  empires   of   Russia and  Austria,  which  practically  meant  Alexander  I.   and  Metternich.  On   their  harmony  or   discord  depended  the   policy   of   the great   powers,  and   consequently  the   decision  of   European  affairs.

As   early   as  1815   a   number  of   questions  began   to   occupy  the diplomatists.  I.   France  had   joined   the"   alliance,  but   the   Hundred Days   had   given   the   impression  that   her   legitimate  government was   threatened.  Must  she   be   freely   admitted  to   the   European concert  or   kept   under  surveillance  and   controlled  in   her domestic  affairs?  This  was  the   French  question,  which  was  settled at   the   Congress   of   Aix-la-Chapelle. pean

2.   The   Allies  had   guaranteed  each  state  its   territory,  but   not its   internal  government.     Must  they   be   left   to   establish  new  constitutions or   should   the   Allies   intervene  to   maintain  absolute monarchy?     This  was  the   intervention  question,  decided  in   connection with   the   Italian   revolutions.

3.   The   Allies  had   guaranteed  the   maintenance  of   all   territory in   Europe  except  the   Ottoman  Empire.     Must  they   also  maintain the   integrity   of   the   Sultan's  territory?     This   was  the   Eastern question,  already  brought  up   at   the   Congress  of   Vienna,  where the   Tsar   refused  to   have   it   discussed.     It   was  to   come  up   again with  the   Greek  insurrection.

4.   The   Allies  had   decided  nothing  about  the   American  colonies.     Should   they   intervene  to   subject   the   Spanish   colonies? The  question  arose  in   1815   and   was  not   decided  until  the   Congress of   Verona.

The  Holy   Alliance  (1815).- The  treaties  of   1815   had  been purely   political  acts,   with   no  religious  character.  Alexander,  influenced by   Christian  mysticists,*  wished  to   re-enforce  the   political alliance  of   the   sovereigns  by   a   religious   alliance.  The   King of   Prussia,  bound  to   him  by   ties   of   friendship  during   the   campaigns of   1813   to   1815,   and   being   personally  a  very  religious man,  approved  this  plan.  The  Emperor  of   Austria  accepted  it out  of   politeness  to   the   Tsar.  The  three  sovereigns,  meeting once  more  in   France,  concluded  a  compact  which  was  solemnly published,  under  the   name  of   the   Holy   Alliance,  September  26, 1815.

*   He   was  at   this   time   subject   to   Mme.  de   Krtidener,  whose  acquaintance he   had   made  in   May,   1815;  she   was  a   mysticist,  born  at   Riga,   in   the   Baltic provinces,  and  had  passed  some  years   in   Switzerland.

This  treaty,  unprecedented  in   European  diplomacy,  began with   an   invocation  to   "   the   most  holy   and   indivisible  Trinity," and   contained  simply  religious  declarations  and  moral  pledges. "   Having  acquired  the   intimate  conviction  that  it   is   necessary to   base   the   course  to   be   pursued   by   the   powers   in   their   mutual relations  on   the   sublime  truths  which  are  taught   by   the   eternal religion  of   God   the   Preserver  of   mankind,  the   sovereigns  solemnly declare   that   the   present   act   is   only   to   show,   in   the   face   of the   world,  their   invincible  determination  to   take  for   their  rule of   conduct  .   .   .   only   the   precepts  of   that   holy   religion,   the   precepts of   justice,   charity,   and   peace,  which,   far   from   being   applicable only   to   private   life,   should,   on   the   contrary,   influence  the resolutions  of   princes   and   guide   all   their   steps.

"   In   conformity  with   the   words  of   Holy   Scripture,  which  order all   men  to   regard   themselves  as   brethren,  the   three  contracting monarchs  will   live   united  by   the   bonds  of   a   true  and   indissoluble fraternity;  and  on  every  occasion  and  in   every  place   they   will lend  each  other  aid   and   succor;  regarding  themselves  in   relation to   their  subjects  as   fathers  of   families,  they   will   direct  them  in the   same  spirit   of   fraternity  ...  to   protect  religion,  peace,  and justice.  The  only   working  principle  between  the   governments or  their  subjects  will  be   to  render  reciprocal  service,  ...  to consider  themselves  all   as  members  of   a   single   Christian  nation, the   three  allied  princes  considering  themselves  only   as  agents of   Providence  to   govern  three  branches  of   the   same  family   .   .   . thus  confessing  that   the   Christian  nation  of   which  they   and   their peoples  form  a   part   has   really   no  other  sovereign  but   .   .   .   God, our  divine  Saviour  Jesus   Christ,  the   Word  of   the   Most  High, the   Word  of   Life."

This  was  a   compact  of   Christian  fraternity  opposed  to   revolutionary fraternity,   but   concluded  outside  of   the   churches,  in   the name  of   the   peoples,  by   the   sovereigns,  "   the   agents  of   Providence." This   Holy   Alliance  between  three  princes  of   rival faiths,   one   Catholic,  one  schismatic,  one   heretic,  was  not   pleasing to   the   court  of   Rome.  A   notable  Catholic  writer,  J.   de Maistre,  denounced  it   as   filled  with  the   "   spirit   of   visionaries  .   .   . who  opposed  religiousness  to   religion   " ; the   true   title   should   have been:  "   Convention  by   which  the   princes   declare  that   all   Christians are   but   one   family   professing   the   same  religion,   and   that the   different  denominations  that  distinguish  them  signify   nothing." It   was,   in   fact,   a   demonstration  of   indifferentism,  a   heresy condemned  by   the   Church.

The  treaty   invited  the   other  powers  to   join   this   Holy   Alliance and  "   to   confess  solemnly  its   sacred  principles."  Louis  XVIII. adhered  to   it   out  of   deference  to   the   Tsar;   the   majority   of   sovereigns did   likewise.  The   English   government  refused,  giving as   its   reason  that   such   a   general   alliance  could  not   be   countersigned by   any  minister,  and   every  act  of   the   English   King   must be   countersigned  by   a   minister.

The  Holy   Alliance  remained  a  solemn  demonstration  without practical   result ; Metternich  called  it   a   "   sonorous  nothing." It   did,   however,  produce  a   distinct  impression  upon   the   enemies of   the   Restoration,  especially  in   France.  The   public   confused  it with  the   alliance  of   the   powers  against   France;  it   became  a   common thing   to   designate  the   Allies  of   1814   by   the   name  of   Holy Alliance,  which  became  to   the   liberals  a   synonym  for   war  against France  and  liberalism. mon

Rivalry  between  Alexander  I.   and   Metternich  (1815-18). - The apparent  harmony  between  the   governments  of   the   great  states concealed  a   secret  struggle  between  the   two  men  who  were  then determining  the  policy  of   Europe,  Alexander  and  Metternich. They  were  opposed  in   character,  political  ideals,  and  practical interests.

Alexander,  naturally  tender,  easily   influenced,  religious,  compassionate, was   devoted  to   his   duties   and   open   to   humanitarian ideas.  Educated  by   a   liberal  instructor,  the   Waldensian  Laharpe,   he   held  an   ideal  of   constitutional  monarchy  with  predominance of   the   sovereign,  almost  the   same  as   the   Tory   theory. In   harmony  with  England  he   had   assisted  in   supporting  a  constitutional system   in   France  and   Switzerland,  and   had   himself granted  a   constitution  to   his   kingdom  of   Poland.

Metternich,  a   blase  and   sceptical  diplomat,  insensible  to   pity, followed  only   the   policy   of   interest,  and   regarded  as   the   fundamental interest  the   preservation  and   support  of   all   existing   institutions, i"   The  basis  of.   modern  policy   is   and   must  be   repose," he   wrote  in   1817.   An   enemy  to   revolution  in   all   its   forms,   he declared  his   preference  for   aristocratic  absolute  monarchy,  and regarded  a  constitution  as  a   weapon  for   revolutionists.

Between  Alexander  and  Metternich  the   chief  ground  of   dispute was   the   internal  organization  of   the   European  states  and the  attitude  toward  parties.  Alexander  supported  the  liberal constitutionalists,  Metternich  combated  them.  The  envoys from  Russia  and  Austria  to   the   secondary  courts  strove  against each  other  by   intrigues  for   influence  over  the   governments.  In pute

Germany  the   Russian  agents  supported  the   princes  who  wished to   grant  constitutions  to   their   subjects- Weimar,  Wurtemberg, Baden,  and   Bavaria.  Alexander  became  the   protector  of   the constitutional  states  of   southern  Germany;  the   governments  of Baden  and   Bavaria,  contesting  for   possession  of   the   Palatinate on   the   right   bank   of   the   Rhine,   both   appealed  to   him.  In   Italy, the   King   of   Sardinia,  invited  by   Metternich  in   1815   to   sign   a special  treaty  with   Austria  (see   p.   329),   asked  help   from  England, which   advised  him   to   accept;   he   then   appealed  to   Alexander, who   said   that   the   general   alliance  excluded  all   separate treaties ; thus   Austria  was   defeated  in   her   plan   for   an   Italian  confederation under   her   influence.  In   Spain,   the   Russian  ambassador, all-powerful  with   King   Ferdinand,  maintained,  in   spite of   the   absolutist  party,   the   Garay   ministry,  which  was  attempting financial  reform;  overstepping  his  instructions  he   promised money  and   even  the   acquisition  of   Portugal  and   tried  to   secure for   the   insurgent   American  colonies  an  amnesty  and   a   charter (see   p.   290).   In   France  Alexander  upheld  the  ministry  of Richelieu  (who   as  governor  of   Odessa,  had  spent  many  years in   Russia),  in   support  of   the   Charter,  against   the   Introuvable Chamber,  which  was  trying   to   force  the   King   to   take   a   ministry of   Ultras  (see   p.   117).   He   sent   Louis  XVIII.  a   note  against   the Ultra  demonstrations,  in   which  he   declared  that  the   object   of the   treaty   of   1815   was  to   consolidate  the   order  of   things   established in   France  in   1814.   This  was  to   be   done  by   the   inviolable maintenance  of   royal   authority  and   the   observance  of   the   Constitutional Charter.   He   urged   Louis   XVIII.  to   dissolve  the Chamber.

In   addition  to   direct  intervention  with   the   governments,  Alexander was   in   relations  with   the   notables  of   the   opposition  parties ;   or  at   least   the   liberal  malcontents  gained   authority  from  his name.  It   was  well  known  that  he   did   not   like   the   Bourbons (see   p.   103)   and   that   he   favoured  religious  propaganda  outside of   the   established  churches.  The  Bonapartists,  who  organized a   plot   in   Belgium,   in   1816,   to   drive   out   the   Bourbons  and   replace them  by   the   Prince  of   Orange,  the   brother-in-law  of   the   Tsar, intimated  that   the   Tsar  was   friendly  to   them.  In   Italy   Metternich attributed  the   liberal  and   national  agitation   to   Russian  emissaries; he   accused  them  later  (1819)   of   "presiding  over  clubs  of Carbonari,"  and   complained  of   the   Tsar's  encouragement  of   Bible societies.  He   wrote  to   the   Emperor  of   Austria:  "Since  1815 Alexander  has   given   up   Jacobinism  to   throw  himself  into   mysti-

cism.  Always,  as   his   tendency  is   constantly  revolutionary,  his religious  sentiments  are  equally  so.  .  .   The  desire  of   making proselytes  holds  first   place   in   all   his   calculations.  It   is   in   this spirit   that   he   enlists  the   Jacobins  in   Italy   and   the   sects  in   Europe." (Metternich  includes  under  the   head   of   Jacobins  all   partisans of   a   constitutional  system.)  He   calls  "   the   attention  of cabinets  to   the   progress  of   the   sects  which  are   beginning  to menace  the   peace  of   central  Europe."  He   regarded  Mme.  de Kriidener  as  particularly  dangerous  "   because  her   preachings  are all   designed  to   excite  the   indigent  classes  against   landowners  " rope

In   the   Orient  Alexander  had  pursued  a  policy   of   conquest. In   Napoleon's  time  he   had   already   concluded  a   preliminary  alliance between  France  and   Russia,  leaving   the   West  to   France, on  condition  of   having   a   free   field   in   the   East.  He   had   begun the   conquest  of   the   Ottoman  Empire   in   1806   arid   had   kept   a   piece of   it,   Bessarabia.  Metternich  suspected  him  of   wishing  to   renew the   close   alliance  with   France  and   to   begin   conquest  once more.  Alexander  had  refused,  at  the  Congress  of   Vienna,  to include  the   Sultan  among  the  sovereigns  whose  territory  was guaranteed.  In   reality   he   was  tired  of   the   war  on   the   Danube, as   it   was   breaking  up   the   Russian  army;   he   wanted  no   further complications  on  this   side;   in   1817   he   refused  to   hear  the   envoy from  a   Greek  patriotic  society  who  had  come  to   implore  his assistance.

Congress  of   Aix-la-  Chapelle  and   Alexander's  Conversion  (1818). -   The  rivalry  between  Alexander  and  Metternich  had  been of   profit   to   the   liberals,  by   diminishing  the   violence  of   the   absolutist reaction  in   the   countries  subject   to   the   Tsar's  influence. But   little   by   little   Alexander  became  alarmed  at  the progress  of   the   liberal  parties.  Metternich  began   to   gain   influence over   him   and   to   draw   him   into   supporting  the   absolutist policy. ence.

Alexander's  conversion  began  on  the  question  of   French policy.  Since  1815   the   Allies  had  been  taking  precautions against  a   return  of   the   Revolution.  Their  ambassadors  in   Paris met  once  a   week  to   talk   over  the   state  of   affairs  in   France,  give advice  to   the   French  government,  supervise  the   payment  of   the army  of   occupation,  and  decide  the   movements  of   the   troops. The  instructions  given   to   Wellington,  the   commander  of   the army  of   occupation,  on   November  3,   1815,   informed  him  that the   Allies  had   "   formally  promised  King   Louis  XVIII.  the   sup-

port   of   their   arms  against   any  revolutionary  convulsion  "   and left   the   management  of   the   troops  to   his   discretion.

The  treaty  of   November  20,  1815,   excluded  from  the   government of   France  Napoleon  and  his   family   "   for   the   general   tranquillity of   Europe  "   and   established  between  the   four   Allies  a   permanent league   of   supervision  over   France.  It   was  agreed   "   to renew  at   stated  intervals  meetings  sacred  to   the   great  common interests  and   to   the   examination  of   the   measures  which  in   each of   these  periods   shall   be   deemed  most  salutary  to   the   peace  and prosperity  of   Europe."  The  idea  was  to   make  these  congresses a   regular   institution  through  which  the   great   powers  should  control Europe   and   watch  over   France. manent

The  first   opportunity  for   holding  a   congress  was  the   political state  of   France.  The  Richelieu  ministry  implored  Alexander  to hasten  the   evacuation  of   French  territory.  The  English  government consented  to   diminish  the   army  of   occupation  on  payment of   a   part   of   the   indemnity;  France  procured  the   money   by   a   5 per   cent,   loan,   subscribed  for   at   55   by   an   English   bank,   in   February, 1817.

The  Allies  decided  to   hold  a   meeting  to   settle  upon   definite terms  of   evacuation;  Alexander  proposed  a   congress  like   that   at Vienna,  to  which  all   the   states  of   Europe  should  be   invited. Metternich,  in   order  to  avoid  the   worries  he   had   endured  at Vienna,  secured  the   adoption  of   a  conference  between  the   four Allies  alone,   to   which  France  should  be   invited.

This  conference,  wrongly  termed  the  Congress  of   Aix-laChapelle,  held  in   November,  1818,   was  a   personal  meeting  of   the three  sovereigns  of   Russia,  Austria,  and   Prussia  and   of   the   prime ministers  of   the   five   great   powers.  The   four   Allies  began   by agreeing  among  themselves  before  admitting  France.  They   arranged terms   for   evacuation  in   October.  Alexander,  already disturbed  by   the   discovery  of   a   secret  society   of   Russian  officers, was  greatly  alarmed  by   the   liberal  success  at   the   elections  of October  in   France  (he   had  already  advised  Louis  XVIII.  to change  the   electoral  law).*   Metternich  took   advantage  of   thes&lt; impressions  to   secure  a   secret  convention  between  the   four   Allies,

*An  agent   of   the   Ultra  party,   Vitrolles,  sent  a   note   to   the   Russian ambassador  begging  the  Tsar  to  check  the  revolutionary  movement  by asking   the   King   to   change   his   ministry.  A   secret  note   to   this   effect   was communicated  to   the  Decazes  ministry.  The  ministers  published  it   and accused  the   Ultras  of   having  conspired  against  the   kmg;   this   was de   I'eau   conspiracy   of   1818.   g

## 754          EUROPE    UNDER    THE  METTERNICH  SYSTEM.

November  i.   They  agreed  to  use  their  combined  force  in   case any  uprising  should  succeed  in   France  and   threaten  the   peace  or security  of   her   neighbours.  England  agreed  to   this   only   in   case a   Bonaparte  should  be   placed   on   the   throne.

Having  taken  their  precautions  against  France,  the  Allies granted  to   Richelieu  what  they   had   just   refused  him   in   October, the   admission  of   France  to   the   Alliance.  This  was   done  in   the form  of   a   secret  protocol  (November  15)   and  a   public   declaration. The   secret  agreement  provided  for   war  measures  in   case of   a   revolution  in   France,  the   march  of   the   armies,  and   the   defence of   the   fortresses.  The  Tsar  even  proposed  a   plan   of   campaign. After   this   the   conference  discussed  the   affairs  of   Germany, Spain,   and   the   colonies.

The  Conference  of   Aix-la-Chapelle  was  a   decisive  victory  for Metternich's  policy.  The  chief  result  was  to   proclaim  solemnly the   maintenance  of   the   Alliance  against   the   revolutionists.  "   The happiest  result,"  wrote  Metternich,*  will   be   that   there  is   to   be   no change   in   the   existing   order  of   things,"   and   it   will   be   "   a   most   brilliant triumph   for   the   Cabinets  that   have   never  invoked  the   spirit of   innovation."  It   was  a   moral  defeat  for   Alexander,  "   for   the court  which  has   rendered  homage  to   what  is   called  the   spirit   of the   time   and   which  by   its   words  has   roused  the   hopes   of   innovators and   sectarians  of   every   description."  After  the   Congress, Metternich  wrote :   "   The   Congress  has   encouraged  the   friends  of order  and   peace   in   all   nations  and   everywhere  alarmed  innovators and   factionists."

Alexander's  conversion,  begun  at   Aix-la-Chapelle,  was  completed by   the   impression  of   the   demonstrations  of   "German  students, the   elections  to   the   French  Chamber  in   1819,   and   especially the   murder  of   his   agent   Kotzebue  (see   p.   385).   Metternich used   these   incidents  to   persuade  him   of   the   existence  of   a "   great   conspiracy  that  was  spreading  all   over  Germany  "   and even  of   a  revolutionary  organization  of   the  Liberals  of   all Europe,  which  was  encouraged  by   the   Jacobins  (Liberals)  who surrounded  the   King   of   Prussia,  and  was  directed  by   the   sects. He   secured  the   adoption  in   Germany  of   measures  against  the universities  and   the   press.  In   the   case  of   France  it   was   Alexander himself  who   proposed  intervention.  The  Decazes  ministry,

*   The   benefit  of   the   Congress  of   Aix-la-Chapelle  to   conservative  policy is   set   forth   in   Metternich's  notes  and   in   Gentz's  memoirs  in   a   verbose  and confident  form.  ("   Metternich  Papers,"  vol.  iii.)

abandoned  by   the   Tsar,   turned  to   the   English   government,  which refused  to   interfere.

Austrian  Congresses;  the   Interventions  (1820-23).- The  revolutions in   Spain   and   Italy   completed  Metternich's  triumph  over Alexander.  Within  one  year  four  revolutions  broke  out  in Spain,  Portugal,  Naples,  and  Sardinia,  brought  about  by   army officers  belonging  to   secret  societies,  either  Free  Masons  or   Carbonari. They   had   the   same  program,  the   Spanish   Constitution of   1812,   copied   from   the   French  Constitution  of   1791.   In   France the   assassination  of   the   Due  de   Berri  and   a   series  of   military plots,   added  to   the   outbreaks  in   the   other  countries,  seemed  to justify   Metternich's  warnings  and  predictions.  The  Tsar,   convinced of   the   dangers   of   the   Revolution,  was  converted  to   Metternich's principle   of   intervention.  To   restore  order  in   the   countries disturbed  by   the  Revolution,  the  governments  of   the  great powers  held  congresses,  all   in   Austrian  territory,  at   Troppau  in Silesia  in   1820,   Lay   bach   in   Carniola  in   1821,   and   Verona  in   Venetia  in   1823.

Alexander  himself  proposed  that  the   five   Allies  should  interfere to   check  the   Spanish  revolution ; the   English   government  refused, fearing   to   offend   the   Spanish   nation.  But   the   revolution of   Naples   interested  Austria  directly,  as   her   Italian  subjects  in Lombardy  were  conspiring  with  the  Liberals.  She  prepared troops  and  announced  that  the   Emperor  was  going   to   fulfil  his duty   as   "   natural  guardian  and   protector  of   public   tranquillity  in Italy."  The  French  government,  unwilling  to   let   Austria  set herself  up   as   the   sovereign  power   in   Italy,   suggested  collective intervention  to   the   other  states,   in   order  to   reassure  the   Italians, who  were  alarmed  by   the   entry   of   an   Austrian  army.   The   Tsar agreed,  and   it   was   decided  to   hold  a   congress  of   the   five   great powers.

The  Congress  of   Troppau  was  devoted  to   Neapolitan  affairs. Metternich  proposed  intervention  to   restore  the   absolutist  system that   Ferdinand,  by   an   agreement  with   Austria  in   1815   (see   p.   316), had  promised  not  to   change.  The  Tsar  and   France  wished  to begin   by   negotiating  with  the   King   of   Naples   to   remove  fhe revolutionary  features  of   the   constitution  without  suppressing  it. England  refused  to   hear  of   intervention  ; the   powers,   in   her   view, were  to   guarantee  only   the   territorial  balance  of   power  among the   states  of   Europe;  they   were  not  to   interfere  in   their   domestic policy.  Thus  the  two  opposing  principles  were  formulated: intervention  by   Austria,  the   most  absolutist  power   in   Europe   at

this   time;   non-intervention  by   England,  the   most  liberal  power. This  did   not,   however,  prevent  England  and   Austria  from  being natural  allies  against  Russia.  Intervention  became  henceforth  a part   of   the   absolutist  program,  non-intervention  of   the   liberal  program. (The   latter   was  condemned  by   the   Syllabus;  see  p.   701.)

England  and  France  refused  to  sign   a  collective  declaration. But   Metternich  persuaded  Alexander  to   it   by   showing  him   revolution threatening  everywhere - in   Portugal,  in   the   Diet   of   Warsaw, in   a   riot   of   the   Imperial   Guard  at   Petersburg.*  The   three eastern  powers,  Austria,  Russia,  and  Prussia,  signed  a   declaration of   principle.  Every  state  of   the   European  Alliance  suffering an   internal  revolution  thereby   ceased  to   be   a   member  of   the Alliance  and  remained  excluded  "   until  its   government  should offer  guarantees  for   legitimate  order."  The  powers  agreed  to refuse  to   recognise  illegal   reforms  and   to   bring   into   "   the   bosom of   the   Alliance  "   those  states  in   which  such  changes  should  be made.  They  reserved  the  right   to  employ  first  friendly  overtures, then,   if   necessary,  measures  of   constraint.  Thus  was  the principle  of   intervention  officially  recognised  in   European  public law.  The  Allies  declared  themselves  at  one  in   the  struggle against  revolution  and  ready   to   maintain  by   force  their  work  of 1814,   not  only   their  territorial  arrangements,  but   the   political restoration  of   the   absolutist  system.  This  they   were  to   do,   not only   against   the   will   of   the   people,   but   even   if   need   be   against   the ing

*   He   sent  him   a   doctrinal  exposition  on   the   causes  of   revolution,  summing  them  up   "in  a  single  word,  presumption.  .  .   Religion,  morals, legislation,  political  economy,  administration,  all   seem  to   have  become  a common  good  and  accessible  to  all."  .  .   He  denounces  "the  idea  of emancipation  of   the   peoples  as  absurd  in   itself."  The  evil   arose  from  the governments  of   the   eighteenth  century  who  had  permitted  irreligious  writings and   "talk  of   social  compacts,"  then  from  the   Hundred  Days   and "   the   utterly   wrong  course  of   the   French  government  from  1815   to   1820." "It  is   the  middle  classes  that  have  been  seized  by   this  moral  gangrene. .   .   The  people  doubt  the   movement  ...  the   interested  classes are  the   capitalists  .   .   .   state  officials,  literary  men,   lawyers,  and   the   persons in   charge  of   public   education.  .   .   Their  war-cry,  Constitution  .  . means  change  and  trouble."  "   It   is   not   in   the   midst  of   the   agitation  of passions  that  we  should  think  of   reform.  Wisdom  teaches  us  at   such times  to  confine  our  efforts  to   preservation."  The  same  elements  of destruction  have  existed  from  the  beginning  of   time;  there  have  always been  "   immoral  ambitious  men,   hypocrites,  fanatics,  evil   spirits,   and   makers of   plans."  But  what  gives   them  power   in   our  time  is   "the  liberty  of   the press,  a   plague   unknown  to   the   world  until  the   last   half   of   the   eighteenth century." grene.

will   of   the   governments.  They   constituted  themselves  a   political supreme  court   for   Europe,   directing  an   international  police against  revolution.  The  two  constitutional  monarchies  of   the West,  England  and   France,  kept   out  of   this   demonstration,  but in   a   passive   attitude,   leaving   the   field   clear   for   the   absolutist  monarchies of   the   East.

This   triumph  for   Metternich  was  announced  to   the   world  in the   form   of   a   despatch  from  the   Russian  government  to   its   ambassador at   Naples.  "   The   Neapolitan  revolution  presents  in   itself too   alarming  a   character  to   be   ignored  by   the   sovereigns.  .   . They   have   recognised  this   same  spirit   of   trouble  and   disorder which  will   shortly   lay   waste  the   whole  world.  .   .   The   sovereigns at   once  decided  to   admit  the   legality   of   nothing   that   was established  in   the   Kingdom  of   Naples   by   revolution  and   usurpa- tion." Accordingly  the   sovereigns,  refusing  to   negotiate  with  a   revolutionary government,  invited  the   King   of   Naples   to   come  in person,  to   make  terms  with   them  at   Laybach,  where  the   congress was  now  sitting.  They   also  summoned  the  other  princes  of Italy.

The  Congress  of   Laybach  regulated  the  domestic  arrangements of   the   Kingdom  of   Naples;  King   Ferdinand,  who  had  left Naples  swearing  to   defend  the   constitution,  asked  the   congress  to restore  the   absolutist  system.  The  great   powers  decided  among themselves  to   send  an   Austrian  army   if   the   King's   subjects  did not  submit;  they   then  communicated  their  decision  to   the   envoys of   the   Italian  governments.  France  made  a  useless  demand  to begin   with  conciliatory  measures.  Austria,  acting   in   the   name of   the   sovereigns,  sent  an  army   into   the   Kingdom  of   Naples. The  length   of   the   occupation  was  to   be   settled  by   a   new  congress.

The  Congress  of   Laybach  ended  in   a   public   declaration  from Austria  regarding  the   uniformity  of   views  and   principles  of   the great  powers.  The  French  government  corrected  it   in   an  explanatory note,   which   Metternich  seized   upon   to   represent   France to   the   Tsar  as  a   hotbed  of   revolution.  The   sovereigns  were about  to   leave  Laybach,  where  they   had   been  awaiting  the   result of   the   Austrian  expedition  into   Naples,   when  they   learned  of   the revolution  of   Piedmont  (see   p.   331).   This   was   immediately  followed by   the   Greek  revolt  of   Ypsilanti   in   Moldavia  (see   p.   619). Alexander,  without  hesitation,  gave   his   judgment  against  the revolutionists.  He   offered  an  army  against   Piedmont  and   dis-

owned  Ypsilanti,  whose  name  he   caused  to   be   struck  off   the   rolls of   the   Russian  army.

The  Austrian  army  which  had  been  sent  into  the   Kingdom  of Naples  reduced  it   almost  without  fighting,  in   March,  1821.  In Piedmont,  an   Austrian  army,   joined  to   the   faithful  Sardinian regiments,  scattered  the   insurgent  regiments  at   Novara  (see   p. 332).  Ypsilanti's  band  was  crushed  by   the   Turks.  Metternich took  advantage  of   Alexander's  irritation  to  excite  him  against revolution  and  against  France.*  He  again  issued  a  public declaration  regarding  "   the  vast  conspiracy,"  the  "   impious league  "   organized  "   to   overthrow  existing  institutions."  He spoke   also   of   "   the   barrier  "   that   the   sovereigns  oppose  to   "   this torrent."  The  Eastern  question  was  then  reopened  by   the   Greek insurrections  and  massacres  (see   p.   619).   The  Tsar,   traditional protector  of   Orthodox  believers,  protested  by   an  ultimatum  in June,   1821.  "   Christianity,"  he   said,   "   could  not  remain  a   passive spectator  of   the   extermination  of   a   Christian  people."  But   in   the face   of   Austrian  and   English  resistance,  he   finally   accepted  their mediation,  designed  to   give   the   Sultan  time  to   crush  the   Christian insurgents.  Metternich  had   paralyzed  Alexander.

The  Spanish  question  was  still  to   be   settled.  This  was  the work  of   the   Congress  of   Verona  (October  to   December,  1822) a   meeting  of   the   three  sovereigns  of   the   East,   and   »envoys   from the   great   powers  and   from  the   princes  of   Italy.   The  King   of Spain   had   written  personally  to   Louis  XVIII.  asking   aid   against his   subjects.  The  French  government  did   not  wish  to   interfere, remembering  the   Spanish  national  war  against  Napoleon.  The English  government  declared  intervention  dangerous,  and  refused to   take  part   in   it.   But   Alexander  wanted  war,   "   war  against Spain,  by   France,  with  France,  without  France,  or  against France."  The  powers,  with  the   exception  of   England,  agreed  to send  a   despatch  to  the   Spanish  government  announcing  Eu-

*   He   sent   him   another  memorial  in   May,   1821:  "   A   vast  and   dangerous conspiracy  has  since  1814   gained  enough  power  and  means  of   action  to have  obtained  possession  of   many  posts   in   public  administrations  .   .  . one  word  suffices  to   bring   it   into   public   favour  .   .   .   the   word  Constitution. .   .   Influence,  position,  fortune,  all   that  human  passions  can  covet, hang  .  .  .   from  the  tree  of   liberty,  as   from  a  greased  pole."  .   .   He recommends  an  agreement  between  Russia  and  Austria  which  shall impose  on   their  representatives  the   obligation  of   mutual  support  on  every occasion.  .   .   "   The  factionists  of   every  nation  .   .   .   have  established  a centre  of   information  and  influence  (at   Paris).  .   .   We  must  establish another  in   opposition  "   (Vienna).

ropean  intervention.  The   French  government  still  hesitated  for some  time.  But   the   French  Chamber  wanted  war  as   a   legitimist demonstration.  France  therefore  made  war  to  restore  the   authority of   the   King   of   Spain.   It   was  nothing   more  than   a   military promenade,  ending   with   the   Siege   of   Cadiz  (see   p.   294).

English  Policy   under  Canning.- Until  now  the   alliance  of   the five   powers  had   been   officially  maintained.  England  refused  to intervene  with   her   allies,   but   did   not   intervene  against  them. The   alliance  began   to   break  up   over  two  questions  which  had been   left   unsettled  in   1815,   the   question  of   the   Spanish   colonies and   the   Eastern  question.

A   change  in   English  policy   came  from  a   change   in   the   office of   foreign  minister.  Castlereagh  having  committed  suicide  in 1822,   his   successor,  Canning,  began   by   protesting  at   Verona against  the   Spanish  intervention.  Abandoning  the   passive  attitude, he   interfered  actively  in   opposition  to  the   Allies.  His policy   was  the   opposite  of   Metternich's.  Not  only   did   he,   like his   English  predecessors,  reject   the   principle  of   intervention  in domestic  questions,  saying  that  the   guarantee  promised  to   the sovereigns  by   the   treaties  of   1815   was   "   territorial,  not  political," and  did   not   bind  the   powers  to   maintain  the   internal  system against  revolutions  ; he   went   further,  and   claimed  the   right   to   prevent the   intervention  of   another  power   in   domestic  questions.

The  insurgent  Spanish  colonies  had   organized  as   independent states.  At   the   Congress  of   Verona,  Chateaubriand,  envoy   from France,  proposed  to   extend  the   principle  of   intervention  to   colonies, and   help   the   King   of   Spain   to   subdue  them.  Canning   replied at   first   with   a   Parliamentary  speech   on   the   independence  of peoples  and  national  honour.  He   then  officially  recognised  the Spanish  republics,  January,  1825.  In   answer  to   the   French  expedition to   Spain,   he   interfered  in   Portugal,  sending,  late   in   1826, a   squadron,  then   an   English   army  corps,  against   Don   Miguel.

This  was  the   first   breach  in   the   Metternich  system.

Intervention  in   the   East  (1823-29). - The  Eastern  question had   been   before  the   world  since  1823.   Public  opinion   in   Europe was  very   favourable  to   the   Greek  insurgents,  but   the   governments kept   out   of   the   movement.  The   Congress  of   Verona  refused even   to   receive  the   Greek  envoys,  and   censured  the   revolt. Canning  took  the   initiative  by   recognising  the   Greeks  as   belligerents in   February,  1823.  Alexander,  in   whom  the   Greeks  had hoped  and  whose  friends  urged   him   to   war,   decided  to   take   decisive part   neither   for   the   revolutionary   Greeks  nor   for   the   Sultan,

the   enemy  of   Christians.  He   called  a   conference  at   St.   Petersburg to   restore  peace,  and   proposed  a   compromise :   Greece  to   be divided  into   three  self-governing  principalities.  This  was  unanimously rejected.   The   conference  confined  itself  to   inviting   the Sultan,  in   April,   1825,   to   accept  the   mediation  of   the   powers,   but without  threatening  to   impose  peace  on   him.

Russia  had   begun   negotiations  with  the   Turkish  government on  other  questions,  and   was  awaiting  their  termination  to   bring up   the   Grecian  question.  It   was  only   at   the   end   of   a   year,   April, 1827,   that   the   Grand  Vizier  received  official  communication  of the   Anglo-Russian  protocol  of   1826.  He   refused  to   consider  it. But  England  and  Russia  held  to   their  decision.  France  had   already adhered  to   the   protocol;  the   other  powers,   in   July,   1827, declared  their  readiness  to   impose  Grecian  autonomy  by   force, and   sent  a   fleet   into   Greece.  They   demanded  from  the   Sultan  an armistice  for   the   Greeks,  threatening  in   case  of   a   refusal  to   take active  measures  (August).  Thus  the   situation  was  the   reverse  of that   of   1820:  England  and   France  were  intervening,  but   in   support of   a   revolution,  while  Austria  and   Prussia  refused  to   intervene; Russia  in   1820   intervened  against   the   subjects,  in   1827 against  the   sovereign. port

Alexander  was  about  to   make  a   final  decision,  when  he   died, December,  1825.  His  death  hastened  the  sudden  change  in Russian  policy.  Nicholas,  his   successor,  refused  to   leave  England the   monopoly  in   protecting  the   Greeks;  he   had   before  his accession  expressed  sympathy  for   the   Greek  insurgents.  Canning, taking   advantage  of   these  tendencies,  sent  Wellington  to make  terms  with  Nicholas;  they   agreed   in   April,   1826,   that   England should  offer   her   mediation  to   the   Sultan  and   that   Russia should  support  her.  This  was  an  abandonment  of   Metternich's policy.

The  unexpected  death  of   Canning  in   August  changed  the policy   of   the   English   ministry;  his   successors  wished  to   avoid  all complications.  But  the  three  powers  found  themselves  already entangled.  Their  fleet,   commanded  by   the   English  admiral,  had come  to   the   western  coast  of   Morea  to   impose   a   truce  on   the   two parties.  Ibrahim  at   first  accepted;  then,   on  an  order  from  the Sultan,  began   to   devastate  Messenia.  The  European  fleet  interfered, calling   on   the   Egyptian   fleet   to   depart.   As   in   Ibrahim's absence  his   men  refused  to   move,  the   allied  fleet   took  a   position in   the   harbor  of   Navarino  by   the   side  of   the   Egyptian  ships. The  Christian  sailors  were  so  excited  against  the   Mussulmans

that   a   shot   from   an   Egyptian  vessel  was  enough  to   produce  the battle   of   Navarino  and   the   destruction  of   the   Egyptian  fleet (October  20).   After  this   the   Europeans  withdrew.  The  Sultan demanded  a   disavowal  and  an   indemnity,  which  were  refused. Then,   in   December,  he   broke  off   relations  with   the   three  powers. The   intervention  finally   led   to   a  rupture  with  the   Ottoman Empire.

Even  the   rupture  did   not,   however,  produce  a   general  war. England  simply  sent  a   fleet   in   August,   1828,   which  decided  Mehemet-Ali  to   recall  Ibrahim.  France  sent  an  expedition  into Morea  in   the   same  year.   Russia  alone  entered  upon  war   (February, 1828).

The   war   included  two  campaigns.  That  of   1828  was  simply a   march  of   Russians  across  Roumania,  followed  by   the   siege   of fortresses;  the   Russian  army,   ill   supplied  and  badly   led,   was stopped  before  reaching  the   Balkans,  by   the   intrenched  camp  of Shumla.

The  campaign  of   1829   was   decided  by   a   single   battle  in   Bulgaria. The   Ottoman  army,   disorganized  since  the   destruction of   the   janissaries,  fell   to   pieces.   Diebitsch  profited  by   this   to cross  the   Balkans  and   come  down  to   Adrianople.  He   had   with him  only   about  20,000  men,  some  of   whom  were  disabled,  and was  too  weak  to   take  Constantinople.  But  the   Sultan,  intimidated by   Diebitsch's  decided  attitude,  imagined  himself  at   the mercy  of   the   Russians  and   accepted  all   their  terms:  war   indemnity, destruction  of   the   Turkish  fortresses  in   Roumania,  free passage  of   the   straits  to   ships   of   all   nations,  and   creation  of   the Kingdom  of   Greece  (September,  1829).   The  peace  of   Adrianople (see   p.   620)   established  Russia's  predominance  in   the   east.

The  revolution  of   1830   in   France  was  the   first   breach  in   the work  of   the   Congress  of   Vienna.  It   took  away  the   legitimate government  from  the   Bourbons,  to   whom  the   Allies  had   guaranteed it,   and   gave   it   to   a   revolutionary  government  under  Louis Philippe,  "   King   of   the   barricades."  The   new  government  was established  in   the   name  of   the   sovereignty  of   the   people,   the   doctrine of   the   Revolution,  with   the   tricolour  flag,   the   emblem  of   the Revolution.

Breaking  up   of   the   European  Alliance  (1830).- The  Metternich  system  was  shaken  by   Canning's  policy   and   the   Tsar's  war in   Turkey.  But   hitherto  the   powers   had   conflicted  with   Austria only   on  questions  and   in   countries  outside  of   the   settlements  of 1815.  The  treaties  of   1815   were  still   intact.

Then  came  the   Belgian  revolution,  which  cut   in   two  the   Kingdom of   the   Netherlands,  the   work  of   the   Allies.  Finally   in   England the   Tories,   allied  with   the   absolutist  monarchies  against France,  gave  place   in   November,  1830,   to   the   Whigs,   allied  with the   European  liberals.  The  Alliance  of   1815   was  definitively broken  up;   the   Metternich  system  was  abandoned.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.

## FOR  INTERNATIONAL  RELATIONS,  1814-1896  (chapters  xxv.  to   xxviii.).

BIBLIOGRAPHY.- Waitz,  "   Quellenkunde  der  Deutsche n   Geschichte," edit,  of   1894;   Krones,  "   Grtmdriss  der   cesterr.  Gesch.,"  1882,   may  serve  as bibliog.  for  the  external  history.  (For   recent  publications  see  Ch.-V. Langlois,  "   Manuel  de   Bibliog.  Hist.,"  1896,   §§   161,   163,   183,   184). - For   the technical  history  of   the  wars,  the  "   Catalogue  de   la   Bibliotheque  du Dep6t  de  la   Guerre,"  vol.  in.,   1885,  constitutes  practically  a   handier bibliog.  than  J.   Pohler,   "   Bibliotheca  His. -Mil.,"  3   vols.,   1887-95  (in   course of   publication),  a   universal  catalogue.

DOCUMENTS.- The  diplomatic  documents  are  collected  in  Martens, "   Recueil  des   Traites,  Nouveaux  Supplements,"  3   vols.,  1839-42,  "   Nouveau  Recueil"  in   two  series  (see   Waitz,  "   Quellenk.,"  Nos.  688  and  6078). From  1 86 r   it   is   best  to   resort  to   the   periodic  publication  "   Das  Staatsarchiv."  (see   preface).

The  chief  official  documents  and  story   of   events  are   in   the   annuals  (see preface)  and  the  series  published  under  two  different  titles:  "   Die Gegenwart,"  12  vols.,  1848-56  ;   "   Unsere  Zeit,"  since  1857.

The  English  "   Foreign  and  State  papers,"  pub.   annually  since  1814, contain  valuable  documents  for   all   the   countries.

WORKS.- COMPLETE  HISTORIES.- C.   Bulle,  "   Gesch.  derNeuesten  Zeit," 4   vols.,   i886(see  preface). - G.Weber,  ("   Allgemeine  Weltgesch."),  "Gesch. des   XlXten  Jahrhunderts,"  2  vols.  1879-80,  semi-scientific  popular  edit.Flathe,  "Die  Neueste  Zeit,"  3   vols.,  1888-91  ("Allgem.  Weltgesch.") In   French  there  are  only   academic  manuals.

The  Oncken  coll.,  "Allgem.  Gesch.  in   Einzeldarstellungen,"  historical series  of   periods  (see   preface)  is   still   the   most  scientific  work.

For  the   diplomatic  history,  Debidour,  "   Hist.  Diplom.  de   1'Europe,"  181478,   2   vols.,   1891,   gives   an  account  and   bibliographies.

## ON  THE  PERIOD  1815-30.

DOCUMENTS.- For  Metternich's  policy,  Metternich,  "   Papiers,"  8   vols., 1880-84  (letters  and  acts),  principal  collection  ;   F.   Gentz,   Metternich's agent,  a   number  of   letters  or  memoirs  (given   in   detail  in   Waitz,   "   Quellenkunde," No.   5799). -  For   Russian  policy,   Fozzo  di   Borgo,   "   Correspondance Diplomatique,"  1890. - For  English  policy,  Castlereagh,  "Memoirs  and Correspondence,"  12  vols.,  in   three  series,  1848-49,  1851,  1853;  Stapleton, "   Canning  and  His   Times,"  1835. - For  French  policy,  in   addition  to   the

memoirs  of   Villele,  Pasquier,  Vitrolles,  Hyde   de   Neuville  mentioned  in   the bibliog.  to   chap,   v.;   deSerre,  "   Correspondance,"  6   vols.,  1876-77;  I.   de Crousaz-Cretet,  "   Le   Due   de   Richelieu  .   .   .,"   1897,   extracts  from  the archives  of   foreign  affairs.

WORKS.- COMPLETE  HISTORIES  :   Stern,  "   Gesch.  Europas,"  vol.  i.,   1894, is   the   most  reliable  guide,  but  stops  at  1820. - G-ervinus,  "   Gesch.  des XlXten  Jahrhunderts,"  1855-66,  French  edit.  "Hist,  du   XIXe  Siecle,"  22 vols.,  1864-74,  stops  at   1830,   much  detail,  not  always  reliable.-  Flathe, "   Das   Zeitalter  der   Restauration  und   der   Revolution,"  1883   (Oncken  coll.), fairly   intelligent,  few   references.

The  most  detailed  accounts  of   this   period   are   found  in   the   national  histories, mentioned  for   each  country  :   Treitschke  (Germany),  Springer  (Austria), Bernhardy  (Russia),  particularly  important  for   European  policy, Viel-Castel  (France),  the   leading  French  history  for   foreign  policy,   Spencer Walpole  (England),  Keuehlin  (Italy),  Baumgarten  (Spain),  Hertzberg  and Mendelssohn  (Greece),  Eosen  (Turkey).- Pauli,  "   Gesch.  Englands,"  2   vols., 1864-67  ("   Staatengesch.  d.   n.   Zeit"  coll.),   which  I   have  thought  best   not to   cite   for   England's  domestic  history,  is   useful  for   her   foreign   relations. EPISODES.- E.   Muhlenbeck,  "   Etude  sur   les   Origines  de   laSainte-Alliance," 1888.- A,   Hugo,   "   Hist,  de   la   Guerre  en   Espagne  en  1823,"   2   vols.,   1824-25. - Prokesch-Osten,  "Gesch.  des  Abfalls  der  Griechen  .  .  .,"6  vols.,   1867, Grecian  war.-  VonMoltke,  "   Campagnes  des  Russes  en   Turquie  d'Europe, 1828-29,"  trans,  from  the   German.,  2   vols.  1854   (orig   edit.   1845). tria)

## CHAPTER  XXVI.

## RIVALRY  BETWEEN  RUSSIA  AND  ENGLAND, 1830-54-

Conditions  of   Foreign  Policy   after  1830. - The  Revolution  of 1830   in   France  and   the   Whigs'   accession  to   power   in   England transformed  the  political  situation  of   Europe.  The  two  great states  of   the   West  became  parliamentary  countries  controlled  by liberal  parties;  they   broke  the   alliance  with   the   three  states  that were  still   faithful  to   the   principles  of   the   Restoration.  Europe was  cut   into   two  parts:  the   East,   still   absolutist,  and   the   West, now  become  liberal.

In   the   absolutist  monarchies  of   the   East,   the   direction  remained concentrated  in   the   person  of   the   sovereign  or   his   ministers. The  masters  of   policy   were:  in   Austria,   Metternich,  governing  in the   name  of   the   Emperor  (Francis,  then  Ferdinand  from  1835   to 1848);  after  the   revolution  of   '48,   Prince  Schwarzenberg  ; - in Russia,  Tsar  Nicholas,  autocrat  and   soldier,  who  himself  directed diplomacy; - in   Prussia,  King   Frederick  William  III.,   timid  and peace-loving,  and  after  1840   Frederick  William  IV.,   full   of   fancies, but,   except   for   one  moment  from  1849   to   1%S°&gt;   without  a personal  policy.  Metternich,  growing  old   and   discouraged,  with no  personal  influence  over  Nicholas,  without  means  of   action,  for he   knew  the   Austrian  army   to   be   disorganized,  ceased  to   control diplomacy.  The  influence  passed   into  the   hands  of   the   Tsar,   the master  of   a   victorious  army;   Nicholas  was   from  1830   to   1854   the representative  of   absolutism,  the   adversary  of   revolution  and   of France.

In   the   parliamentary  monarchies  of   the   West  the   ministers  no longer   decided  foreign   policy   alone :   they   had   to   reckon  with   the Chambers  and  the  opinion  of   the  people.  In   France  Louis Philippe,  desirous  of   consolidating  his   throne  and   providing  for his   children,  had   personally  a  peaceful  policy;   but,   as  a   parliamentary King,   he   had   to   appear   to   leave   the   government  to   his ministers.  He  evaded  the  difficulty  by   taking  ministers  from those  who  advocated  his  policy  (Casimir-Perier,  Broglie,  and Guizot),  or  without  policy   (Mole   and   Soult),   or  when  he   was

obliged   to   submit   to   ministers  of   the   Left   (Laffitte  and   Thiers), by   hindering  their   influence.  In   fact,   France's  policy   was  that   of Louis   Philippe,  a   policy   of   peace  and   inactivity,  interspersed  with belligerent  demonstrations  to   satisfy   national  self-respect.

Under  these  official  heads  of   Europe  an  accessory  role  in European  diplomacy  was  played  by   a   new  sovereign  family,   that of   Saxe-Coburg.  Leopold,  having  become  King   of   the  Belgians and   then   son-in-law  of   the   King   of   France,  arranged  a marriage  for   one  of   his   nephews,  Ferdinand,  with  the   Queen   of Portugal  in   1836,   and   for   another,  Albert,  with  the   Queen   of England  in   1840;   the   relations  of   the   Coburg   family   with  the reigning  houses  permitted  them  at   times  to   act  as  mediators  between the   courts  of   the   great   states.

England  the   sovereigns,  William  and  later  Victoria,  left to   the   ministry  even  the   direction  of   foreign   affairs;  English policy   therefore  depended  on  the   ministerial  party  and  varied with   the   changes  of   majority.  The  Conservative  party  maintained its   policy   of   peace  and   abstention,  but   it   was  in   power only   for   short   intervals  (1834-35,  1841-46,  1852).   The  Liberal or   Whig   party   thus   determined  England's  attitude,  and   this   party left   the   direction  of   foreign   policy   almost  entirely   to   Lord  Palmerston,  the   minister  of   foreign   affairs.  Palmerston  posed   as the   champion  at   once  of   English   national  honour  and   the   liberal system;  his   policy   was   to   intimidate  the   great   powers   by   display of   troops,   threats   of   wars,  and   secret  negotiation  with   liberal  malcontents of   every  country  to   excite  them  against  their  governments. 'For   more   than   thirty   years   (he   died   in   1865)   he   succeeded in   hiding   England's  military  weakness,  and   made  her   the rival   of   Russia  as   a   controlling  power.  Europe   from  1830   to 1854   was   dominated  by   the   rivalry   between  Nicholas  and  Palmerston, symbols   of   the   absolutist  East   and   the   liberal  West. ments.

European  policy   became  more  complicated  and  more  unstable than  at   the   time   of   the   Restoration.  This   was  a   period   of   active and  intricate  plots,   revolutions,  and   demonstrations,  which  filled the   newspapers,  aroused  violent  feeling,  and   in   the   end   accomplished but   little.

Foreign  policy  was  expressed  by   certain  official  formulae. Maintenance  of   treaties  was  the   preservation  of   the   territorial  arrangements of   1815.  Intervention  signified  for   the   great   powers the   right   to   interfere  in   the   internal  affairs  of   secondary  states in   order  to   maintain  the   system  established  in   1815.   When  they interfered  in   the   opposite  direction,  it   produced  a   struggle  for

## 766  RIVALRY  BETWEEN  RUSSIA   AND  ENGLAND.

influence,  unless  it   resulted  in   a  conference  to  restore  the European  concert.  The  European  balance  of   power,  an  old   formula of   the   old   regime,   was  the   endeavour  to   keep   any   of   the   five   great powers  from  extending  its   dominion,  especially  in   the   Ottoman Empire,  which  was  outside  of   the   treaties  of   1815.

Every  internal  complication  in   each  country  was  for   the   great powers  a   temptation  to   interfere  and   extend  their  influence  and an  occasion  for   debating  the   question  whether  it   was  necessary to   interfere  for   the   support  of   the   treaties  or  of   the   balance  of power.

Recognition  of   the   July   Monarchy  (1830). - The  revolution  of 1830   was  a   violation  of   the   treaties  of   1815;   by   driving   from France  the   Bourbons,  whose  dynasty  the   powers  had   guaranteed, it   opened   up   the   casus  belli   foreseen  by   the   convention  of   1818 (see   p.   751 ),   it   therefore  presented  the   question  of   intervention  in France  against  the   revolution.

But   the   Allies  did   not   feel   strong   enough   to   interfere;  Louis Philippe  represented  to   them  that  he   had  accepted  the   throne only   to   stop   the   revolution,  that   his   presence  alone  guaranteed France  against  a  republic,  and  assured  the   maintenance  of   the treaties  of   1815.   England,  where  the   Tory   ministry  was   held  in check  by   a  strong  Whig  minority,  refused  to   interfere;  she ordered  her   ambassador  to   remain  in   Paris,   then  recognised  the government  of   Louis  Philippe.*  Metternich  did  not  even  ask the   execution  of   the   convention  of   1818;   no  power   had   its   army ready   to   march.  The  Tsar  alone  wished  to   crush  the   Revolution; he   ordered  his   Russian  subjects  to   leave  France,  forbade the   tricolour  flag   in   Russian  ports,  and   sent  agents  to   the   Austrian and   Prussian  courts,  urging   them  to   war.  But   the   other governments  having  recognised  the  usurper,  he   did  the  same. He   contented  himself  with  showing  his   contempt  by   refusing  to call   him   "   my   brother,"  as   the   other  sovereigns  did.

The  revolutionary  monarchy  of   France,  in   spite   of   the   treaties of   1815,   joined   the   European  concert.  But  "the  King   of   the barricades  "   remained  an   intruder  to   the   other  sovereigns;  Louis Philippe  felt   himself  always  regarded  in   Europe  as  an  upstart, and   the   desire  to   put   an  end   to   this   partial   "   boycott  "   was  one  of the   constant  features  of   his   policy.

Settlement   of    Belgium    (1830-32). - The   Belgian   revolution

*   There  is,   so   far   as   I   know,   no  reason  for   supposing  that  the   Wellington ministry  had  any   thought  of   interfering  in   the   domestic  affairs  of   France. -S.  M.   M.

,vas  a   second  breach  in   the   treaties  of   1815.   King   William  asked the   great   powers  to   restore  him   in   possession  of   the   territories guaranteed  him   in   1814.  England  called  a  conference  at   London to   try   and   save   the   kingdom   by   persuading  the   Belgians  to be   content  with   a   separate  administration.  The   King   of   Prussia, William's  brother-in-law,  assembled  an  army  on   the   Dutch  frontier. The   Tsar   offered  60,000   men,  and   his   envoy   Diebitsch  remained two   months  in   Berlin  to   urge   the   King   to   war.

But   the   French  government,  urged   by   the   party   of   action  (see p.   134),   took   the   part   of   the   Belgians.  The   idea   was  to   satisfy national  self-respect  by   destroying  even  in   a   secondary  matter, the   treaties  of   1815,   setting   up   the   principle  of   non-intervention and  thereby  securing  the   demolition  of   the   Belgian  fortresses erected  against  France,  or  even  the   cession  of   a   bit   of   territory. France  stopped  Prussia  by   declaring  that,   if   a   Prussian  army should  enter  from  the   east,   a   French  army  should  enter  from  the west.  The  Tsar,  on  the  point   of   interfering,  was  hindered  by the   Polish  revolution  (see   p.   587).

When  the  London  Conference  opened,  the   Tory   ministry  had been  replaced  by   a   Whig   ministry.  Palmerston  had   the   direction of   foreign  affairs  and   adopted  the   policy   of   an  understanding between  the   two   liberal  powers,   France  and   England.  He agreed  with  Talleyrand,  France's  representative,  to   set  up   the principle  of   the   absolute  separation  of   Belgium.  The  envoys from  the   Eastern  powers,  having   no  precise   instructions,  yielded. The  Conference  imposed  a   truce  on  the   two  parties,  then  recognised the   independence  of   Belgium,  in   December,  1830.

The  Conference  had   to   determine  the   territory  of   the   new   kingdom, the   division  of   the   debt   between  the   two  states,  and   the choice  of   the   Belgian   king.   Talleyrand  demanded  for   France  an annexation  of   territory,  Luxemburg  or  at   least   Philippeville  and Marienburg,  in   order  to   satisfy   French  national  pride;   Palmerston, out   of   English   national  pride,   refused.*  It   was  agreed   to give   the   throne  to   no  prince   of   any   of   the   five   great   powers.

i.   January  20,   1831,   the   bases  of   the   separation:  the   whole   of Luxemburg  to   be   given   over  to   the   King   of   Holland,  about   half of   the   total   debt   to   Belgium.  The   King   of   Holland  agreed;   the Belgian  Congress  refused  and  elected  as   King   a   son  of   Louis

The  conference  adopted  three  arrangements  in   succession  :

*Palmerston  wrote:  The  French  government  constantly  says  to   us: 'This  or   that  must  be   done  to   satisfy  public   opinion  in   France,'  but   it should  consider  that  public   opinion  exists  in   England  as   well   as   in   France."

Philippe.  Palmerston  threatened  France  with  war  if   he   should accept;  Louis  Philippe,  in   spite   of   his   ministry  of   actionists,  decided on   a   refusal.  The   kingdom  was  then   offered  to   Leopold of   Coburg,  who  exacted,  before  accepting,  a  mitigation  of   the conditions  of   January  20.

2.   June   26,   1831,   the   18   articles:  the   status  quo   in   Luxemburg, the  debt  contracted  before    1816  to    be   assigned  to    Holland. Belgium  accepted;  and   now  it   was   Holland  that   refused  and   sent an  army   into  Belgium.     Leopold  asked  'help   from  France;  the French  army  entered  to   carry  out  the   decisions  of   the   conference. Palmerston,   disturbed  at  seeing  the   French  in    Belgium,   demanded evacuation  and   arranged  a   truce;   but   the   French  army remained  until  the   Conference  should  have  arranged  for   the   demolition of   the   fortresses  erected  against  France.

3.   October  15,   1831,   the   24   articles:  restitution  to   Holland  of a   portion   of   Luxemburg  and   Limburg;  Belgium  made  no  objection, but   the   King   of   Holland  persisted   in   his   refusal.    The   Conference concluded  the   definite  treaty.      The   great   powers  recognised the   Kingdom  of   Belgium  as  a   neutral  state   in   1832.     The fortress  of   Antwerp  had   now  to   be   taken  from  the   Dutch.     The two  Western  states  agreed   to   employ  force,   against  the   wish  of the   other  powers.

The   Polish  Question  (1830-32). - The  Polish  insurgents  against the   Tsar  asked  help   from  the   Western  powers.  The  liberal  parties supported  them  out  of   hatred  for   Nicholas;  the   opinion  of all   educated  Europe  showed  itself  strongly  in   their  favour.  The Laffitte  ministry  attempted  to   urge   the   Sultan  to   war.  The   Casimir-Perier  ministry  proposed  to   England  a   joint   mediation.  But neither  France  nor   England  had  any  means  of   action  against  a Russian  army   in   Poland,  and   Palmerston  refused  to   take  part   in a   proceeding  without  practical  effect.  Poland  therefore  received only   demonstrations  of   sympathy;  the   French  Chamber  voted  in the   address  to   the   King   a   phrase   expressing  the   conviction  "   that the   Polish  race  would  not  perish."

The  Polish  war,  reduced  to   a   struggle  between  the   Polish  and Russian  armies,  ended  in   the   crushing  of   the   Polish  nation.  Palmerston, by   virtue  of   the   treaties  of   1815,   claimed  the   maintenance of   the   privileges  assured  to   the   Poles.  Russia  replied   that

The  Eastern  powers  divided.  Austria  declared  herself  neutral, and  was  rather  favourable  to  the  Poles,  although  insurgents; Prussia,  which  hated  Poland,  aided  the  Russian  army  with supplies.

the   Treaty   of   Vienna  imposed  on   her   no  conditions  of   internal government;  the   Constitution  of   1815,   having   been  only   a   spontaneous act   of   the   Tsar,   was  annulled  by   the   fact   of   the   rebellion.

In   France  the   taking   of   Warsaw  was  a   national  grief;   in   Paris, business  was  suspended,  the   theatres  closed,  and   the   declaration from  the   minister  of   foreign   affairs,   "   order  reigns   in   Warsaw," was  regarded  as  an   insult  (1832).

Intervention  of   Austria  and  France  in   Italy   (1831-32),-- In Italy   the   revolution  in   the   central  states,  the   States  of   the   Church, Modena,  and  Parma,  had  resulted  in   the   creation  of   provisional governments.  The  dispossessed  sovereigns  asked  aid   from  Austria. In   France  the   "   party   of   action  "   urged   the   support  of   the liberal  insurgents  against   Austria's  proteges.  The  Laffitte  ministry declared  that   the   Austrians  would  be   allowed  to  occupy Parma,  but   not  the   States  of   the   Church.  The  Austrian  army from  Lombardy  occupied  all   the   insurgent  countries  in   March, 1831.  The  Casimir-Perier  ministry  offered  no  resistance,  and contented  itself,   after   the   submission  of   the   Italians,  with   demanding the   retreat  of   the   Austrian  army.   To   satisfy   French  national pride,   it   declared  its   intention  to   occupy  a   portion   of   the   States of   the   Church  if   the   Anstrians  did   not  evacuate  before  the   opening of   the   Chambers.

The  Austrian  a-my,   having  accomplished  its   work,  withdrew from  the   States  of   the   Church.  But   when,   in   January,  1832,   it returned  at   the   Pope's   call,   the   French  government  found  itself obliged  to   carry  out   its   threat.  It   sent  three   ships   with   1200  men to   occupy  the   citadel  of   Ancona.  Austria  took   advantage  of   this to   leave   her   troops   in   the   States  of   the   Church  until   1838.

Intervention  in   Spain   and   Portugal  (1833-36). - In   Spain   and Portugal  intervention  began   with  a  question  of   succession  disputed between  a   minor  queen  supported  by   the   Liberals,  Isabella in   Spain,   Maria  in   Portugal,  and   a   pretender  supported  by   the absolutists,  Carlos  in   Spain,   Miguel   in   Portugal.  The   two   parliamentary states   of   the   West  recognised  the   two  queens,  while the   three  absolutist  monarchies  of   the   East,   while   not   officially recognising  the   two  absolutist  pretenders,  yet   gave   them   their support.

The  liberal  ministry  in   Spain   asked  aid   from   England.  Palmerston  advised  the   governments  of   the   two  queens  to   make   an alliance  with  each  other  and   with  England;  Talleyrand  secured the   entrance  of   France  into   the   combination,  and   in   April,   1834, the   Quadruple  Alliance  was  concluded.  The   powers  undertook

49

to   expel   both  pretenders  from  Portugal,  England  with  her   fleet, Spain   with  her   army;  the   participation  of   France  would  be   regulated later,   if   there  was  need  of   it.   The   treaty   stipulated  no   intervention in   Spain;   Palmerston  had  not  wished  to   furnish  France this   opportunity  to   gain   a   foothold  in   the   peninsula.

Palmerston  presented  the   Quadruple  Alliance  as  a   league  of the   four  constitutional  monarchies  of   the   West  which  counterbalanced the   league   of   the   three   absolutist  monarchies  of   the East.  It   was  more  a   demonstration  than  an  effective  act.  It had  almost  no  result  except   in   Portugal.

The   Eastern  Question  (1832-33).- The   Tsar,   since  the   treaty  of 1829,   had   kept   the   Ottoman  Empire  under  his   influence.  France supported  Mehemet-Ali,  the   Egyptian  pasha:   in   popular  opinion he   was  regarded  in   France  as   the   future  regenerator  of   the   Ottoman Empire   and   the   faithful  ally   of   the   French. man

Palmerston  declared  the   integrity  of   the   Ottoman  Empire  indispensable to   English  interests;  it   was  to   him   a   dogma   which was  not  to   be   discussed.  He   distrusted  Mehemet-Ali,  attributing to   him   a   project   for   creating   an   Arabian  kingdom.  Ibrahim's expedition  into   Syria,   followed  by   the   march  of   the   Egyptian army   into   Asia   Minor,   made  a   vivid  impression  on  public opinion  in   1832.   The  Sultan,  having   failed  to   secure  aid   from the   maritime  states,  appealed  to   Russia,  which  sent  troops  in April,   1833.

France  and  England,  by   frightening  the   Sultan,  succeeded  in making  him  accept  Mehemet-Ali's  conditions.  Russia  made  no objection,  but   used  the   Sultan's  irritation  to   secure  the   treaty   of alliance  of   Unkiar-Skelessi  in   July,   1833   (see   p.   622).

The  Refugees  and  the  Alliance  of   the   Absolutist  Monarchies (1833). - The  three  Eastern  powers,  Russia,  Austria,  and   Prussia, discontented  with  the   intervention  of   the   Western  states  in   Belgium, Spain,   and   Portugal,   disturbed  by   the   agitations  of   German, Polish,   and   Italian  revolutionists,  who   had   taken  refuge   in Switzerland  and  France,  arranged  together  for   a   demonstration against  revolution.  This  was  the  Miinchengraetz  interview  of September,  1833,   between  the   Emperor  of   Austria,  the   Tsar,   and the   Crown  Prince  of   Prussia.  A   manifesto  was  drawn  up,   but the   King   of   Prussia  refused  to   sign   it   for   fear   of   being   entangled in   a   war,  and   they   had   to   be   content  with   the   secret  treaty   of   Berlin, October  15,   1833.   The   three   sovereigns,  "   in   consideration

England  and  France  were  informed  of   this,   but   could  not  arrange to   co-operate  against  Russia.

of   the   dangers  with   which  the   order  of   things   established  in Europe  by   public   law   and   treaties,  especially  those  of   1815,   continued to   be   threatened,"  declared  themselves  "   unanimously  resolved to   consolidate  the   system  of   preservation  which  constitutes the   immutable  basis   of   their   policy."  Consequently  they "   recognised  that   every   independent  sovereign  has   the   right   to call   to   his   aid,   in   the   domestic  troubles  as   in   the   external  dangers of   his   country,  such   other  independent  sovereign  as  seems  to   him most  fitted   to   assist   him,   and   that   the   latter   has   the   right   to   refuse such  aid   according  to   his   interests  or  convenience.  In   case  this aid   should  be   granted,  no  power  not   invoked  ...  by   the   threatened state   has   the   right   to   interfere,   either   to   prevent  the   assistance or   to   act   in   a   contrary   direction.  In   case  the   material assistance  of   one  of   the   three  courts  should  be   called  for   and   any power  should  wish  to   oppose  it   by   armed  force,   the   three  courts should  consider  as   directed  against   each  of   them  any   act  of   hostility undertaken  with   this   end."  This   was  an  engagement  to maintain  the  doctrine  of   intervention  *   formulated  in   1820  - an Eastern  league   opposed  to   that   of   the   West. ance

Rupture  of   the   Alliance  between  France  and   England  (183640).  - The  understanding  established  between  France  and  England in   1830   broke  up   of   itself,   owing   to   the   difference  in   interest of   the   governments.

After  the   death  of   Emperor  Francis,  the   agreement  between the   three  courts  was  renewed  by   two   interviews  in   1835   at   Kalisch in   Poland  and  at   Teplitz.  It   was  agreed   to   publish  no  manifesto. "   What  the   three  courts  wish  is   generally  known,"  wrote Metternich ; "   to   repeat   it   is   useless,   and   could   have   no  other   result than   to   weaken  their   strong  position."

i.   Both  were  parliamentary  governments  of   property  holders, obliged  to   consider  the   passions  of   the   middle  class.  Now,   in both  countries  the   recollection  of   the   long   wars   between  England and  France  was  still   vivid.  The  national  heroes  were,   in   England Wellington,  the   conqueror  of   Waterloo,  in   France  Napoleon, the   mortal   enemy  of   England.   In   this   time,   when   the army   was  composed  entirely  of   poor  men,  the   liberal  middle  class

*   Metternich,  as   early   as  1833,   spoke   contemptuously  of   the   July   Monarchy. "This  throne  has   created  nothing  ...  all   it   can   do   is   to   maintain  itself.  Its  only   product  is   that  of   the   so-called  principle  of   nonintervention, .   .   .   the   only   invention  that  has   been  made  by   the   capital of   propaganda,  ...  a   negative  means  of   keeping  other  states  in   the nullity  of   action  that   its   own  position  necessitates."

## 772  RIVALRY  BETWEEN  RUSSIA    AND  ENGLAND.

in   France  spoke   freely   of   war  and   conquest,  to   destroy   the   odious treaties  of   1815   and   restore  the   "   national  boundaries,"  the   Rhine and  the   Alps.   The  English  Parliament  loved  to   boast  of   England's glory,   her   domination  on   the   seas  and   in   Europe.  English patriotism  consisted  in   regarding  insular  affairs  only   as worthy  of   consideration  and   employing  the   word  continental  as  a term  of   contempt.  The  difficulty  increased  when  the  great political   questions  which  had   absorbed  the   attention  of   all   parties had   been  almost  settled - in   England  after  the   reforms,  in   France after  the   strengthening  of   the   monarchy.  Domestic  policy,   which had  become  stagnant,  ceased  to  arouse  the  public   and  fill   the newspapers.  Interest  was  centred  on   foreign  affairs.  The  opposition, especially   in   France,   finding   at   home  no  material  with which  to   excite  the   middle  class  against   the   government,  busied itself  with  foreign  policy,   in   which  it   sought   to   exalt  national pride.  Between  these  two  jealous  and  conceited  nations  there was  continual  rivalry   and   incessant  coolness.  The   governments, for   fear   of   dangerous  unpopularity,  had   to   be   always   ready   to sustain  "   national  honour,"  which  practically  meant  to   refuse  all that   the   rival   nation  asked  for.  These  sentiments  were  enough to   make  harmony  difficult.

2.   Louis  Philippe  wished  to   be   accepted  by   the   legitimate  sovereigns and,   by   means  of   alliances  with   the   old   dynasties,  introduce his   family   into   monarchical  society.  He   laboured  personally to   regain   favour  with  the   Eastern  monarchs,  who  led   the courts  of   Europe,  and  to   free   himself  from  the   compromising union  with  the   liberal  ministries  of   England. duce

The  coolness  became  apparent  as  early   as  1836.   In   the   countries where   England   and   France  had   interfered  together,  Greece, Spain,   and   Portugal,  each  supported  a   party  subject  to   its   own influence  and   strove  to   excite  it   against   the   party   of   the   other.

The  discord  was  shown  especially  in   Spain.  Louis  Philippe supported  his  kinswoman  Christina  and  the  moderate  party. England  sided  with  the   progressists.

The  Spanish  government,  threatened  by   the  Carlists,  asked help   from  the  Quadruple  Alliance  in   1836.  Louis  Philippe promised  it;   but   as   the   progressists  had  gained   control  of   the government  by   a   revolution,  he   broke  with  Thiers  and   remained neutral  between  Isabella  and   Don  Carlos.

Louis  Philippe  made  overtures  to  the  Eastern  powers.  He wished  to   marry   his   eldest  son,   the   Duke  of   Orleans,  and   sent him  to   visit   the   courts  of   Prussia  and   Austria.  In   Vienna  the

Duke  met  with  a  cold  reception;  the   Austrian  nobility,  being legitimist,  ignored  his   presence.  He   asked  for   the  hand  of   a daughter  of   the   Archduke,  but   was  refused.  Louis  Philippe  was hurt,   and   resigned  himself  to   the   acceptance  of   a   princess  proposed by   the   King   of   Prussia,  Helen  of   Mecklenburg,  who  became Duchess  of   Orleans.

The   Eastern  Question  and  the   Straits  Convention  (1839-41).The  official  rupture  between  France  and  England  came  on  the Eastern  question.  All   the   great   powers  announced  the   intention of   maintaining  the   integrity  of   the   Ottoman  Empire.  France alone  had   not   defined  her   policy;   she   hesitated  between  the   Sultan, her   traditional  ally,   and   Mehemet-Ali,  her   protege.

The  question  was  little  by   little  complicated  by   the   personal intrigues  of   English  representatives.  Sultan  Mahmoud,  urged by   Ponsonby,  the   English  ambassador,  wished  to   avenge  the   defeat of   1832,   and   in   1839   ordered  his   army   to   invade  Syria;   the Egyptian  forces  were  at   the   frontiers.

England  and  France,  once  more  working  together,  wanted  to impose  a   truce  on   the   two  parties.  But   when  the   French  envoy arrived  at   Constantinople  to   put   a   stop   to   hostilities,  Ponsonby refused  to   assist,   because  he   had   received  no   instructions.  The Turkish  government  concluded  from  this  that  England  wanted war,  and   gave   the   order  to   march.  The  Ottoman  army  was  put to   rout   (June,   1839);   then  the   Ottoman  admiral,  going   over  to the  winning  party,  led   the   fleet  to   join   that  of   Mehemet-Ali (July).  Mahmoud  had  just   died;  Khosrew,  in   the   name  of   the new  Sultan,  Abdul-Medjid,  offered  to  make  peace.  Mehemet refused  to   negotiate  with  him.

The  Tsar  had  intervened  by   right   of   the   treaty  of   1833.   To prevent  his   working  alone,  the   other  powers  announced  to   the Sultan  that  they   would  take  the   question  in   hand,   and   engaged him  to  await  the   result  of   their  course  before  making  terms (July   24).   But   France  and   England  disagreed  on  the   terms  to be   imposed  on   Mehemet-Ali.  Palmerston  wanted  to   demand  the restitution  of   the   Turkish  fleet,   and   proposed  to   demand  it   by   an ultimatum  ; the   French  government  refused  to   agree  to   this.

Palmerston,  changing  his   tactics,  entered  into   negotiation  with the   Eastern  powers,   first   with   Austria,  offering  to   call   upon   Mehemet to   return  the   fleet,   and,   if   he   refused,   to   blockade  the   coasts of   Egypt   and   Syria;   he   added  that   if   necessary  England  would act   "   with   less   than   four   powers."  The   Tsar,   seizing   the   chance to   isolate  France,  sent  an  offer  of   co-operation  to   England;  he

renounced  his   separate  treaty  of   1833   with  the   Sultan,  and   declared himself   ready   to   work  in   harmony  with   all   his   allies,   but by   preference  without  France  (September).

Palmerston  proposed  the   simultaneous  entry  of   the   three  fleets, English,  French,  and  Russian;  the  French  government  (Soult) agreed.  But  when  the   Chamber  met,   in   January,  1840,   the   Soult ministry  fell,   and   public   opinion   in   France  declared  itself  firmly opposed  to   any   ultimatum  to   Mehemet-Ali.

Palmerston  finally   negotiated  independently  of   France.  The four  other  powers  concluded  with  the   Sultan  the   Treaty   of   London, July   15,   1840,   which  determined  the   ultimatum  to   be   imposed on   Mehemet-Ali:  the   Sultan  offered  him   only   hereditary Egypt  and  a   part   of   Syria   during   his   lifetime,  and   this   on  condition that   'he   should  accept   within  ten   days;   at   the   end   of   that   time he   would  be   driven  back  into   Syria,   and   ten   days   later   the   Sultan would  no   longer   be   bound  to   anything.  The  powers  agreed  to fulfil   these  conditions  by   force.

As   in   1815,   France  found  herself  alone  against   the   four   allies; their  decision  took  the   aspect  of   an  ultimatum  addressed  to France  over  the   head  of   Mehemet-Ali;  the   Eastern  question  became a   question   of   national  honour.  The  Chambers  became wildly  excited;  people  began   to   talk  of   renewing  the   struggle against  Europe,  of   breaking  down  the   treaties  of   1815,   even  of regaining  the   Rhine  frontier.  This  aroused  a   counter  movement in   Germany  (see   p.   389).   The   Thiers  ministry,  which  rested  only on  national  feeling,*  began   to  prepare  armament,  and  Austria and  Prussia  concluded  arrangements  in   the  event  of   a  war (November).  But  neither  Louis  Philippe  nor  the  Chamber wanted  war.  Mehemet-Ali  had  rejected  the   ultimatum.  France recalled  her   fleet  to   Toulon  and  left   the   powers  a   free  field against   him.

A   combined  English,  Austrian,  and   Turkish  fleet  bombarded the   Syrian   ports;   it   destroyed  in   three  hours  St.   Jean   d'Acre, which  was  thought  to   be   impregnable,  and   then  went  to   blockade Alexandria.  Mehemet,  abandoned  by   France,  yielded,  in   November, 1840.   The   allies   then   consented  to   annul  the   treaty   of

*   Before  the   break  with  England  the   French  government  had  asked  of Palmerston - who  willingly  granted  it  - permission  to   bring   back  to   France the   body   of   Napoleon  I.  ,   which  had   been  buried  at   St.   Helena.  The   Prince of   Joinville  was  sent  to   bring   it;   on   his   return,  the   Thiers  ministry  had fallen,  and  the   transfer  of   Napoleon's  ashes  to   the   Invalides  was  simply   an official  ceremony.

London,  and   to   replace   it   with  a   general   treaty  of   all   the   powers with  the   Sultan,- the   Straits  Convention  of   July,   1841,  - which declared  the   straits  closed  to   all   war  vessels.  But   France's  pride had   received  a   wound  for   which  the   middle  classes  could  not   forgive England.

The   "   State   of   Good   Feeling"  (1841-45),- The   succession  of   a Right  Centre  ministry  in   France  (Guizot)  and  a   Conservative ministry  in   England  to   the   control  of   foreign   affairs,   both   with   a policy   of   peace  and   conciliation,  led   to   a   desire  for   a   restoration  of good   feeling   between  the   two  governments.  They   tried  to   restore harmony  between  the  two  states.  The  sovereigns  exchanged visits,   Victoria  in   France  at   the   Chateau  d'Eu  in   1843   an-d   1845, Louis  Philippe  in   England  in   1844;   the   ministries  chatted  together amicably,   and   all   official  utterances  spoke   of   the   friendly feeling   between  the   two  countries.

But  the  understanding  was  between  the  governments  alone, and  they   had   to   contend  with  public   opinion  to   avoid  conflicts between  the  two  nations.  In   France,  the  public  mind  was aroused  against  the   droit  de   visile,   or  right   of   searching  vessels engaged  in   the   slave  trade,   and   still   more  against   the   Pritchard indemnity  (see   p.   147).   In   England,  the   public   protested  against the   tariff   union  between  France,  Belgium,  and   Switzerland,  and the   government  declared  that   England  regarded  it   as  an  attempt against  the  independence  of   Belgium:  she   could  not  permit French  soldiers  to   work  in   Antwerp  under  the   disguise  of   customs officials   (1842).   Public  opinion   was  also   aroused  by   the French  war  against   Morocco.

It   was   then   that   Tsar   Nicholas  came  to   England   (1844)   to   propose an   arrangement  with   the   Tory   government  for   settling   together the   fate   of   the   Ottoman  Empire,  whose  end   he   believed  to be   near  at   hand.  He   disclaimed  any   desire  to   take   any   part   of its   territory,   but   could   not   allow   any   other   power   to   seize   it.   The English  ministers  refused  to   discuss  the   question.

The  Spanish  Marriages  (1846).- Queen   Isabella  of   Spain   and her   younger  sister  Louisa  were  now  of   marriageable  age:   their mother  wished  to  give   their  hands  to   French  princes.  Louis Philippe  took  this   opportunity  to   provide   for   his   son,   the   Duke of   Montpensier.  The  two  governments  of   France  and   England came  to   an   agreement  as   to   these  marriages.  They   settled   the principle  in   1845   that   Queen   Isabella  should  marry  a   Bourbon, and   that   after   she   should  have   issue  the   Infanta  Louisa   might   1 married  to   the   Duke  of   Montpensier.  One   of   two   cousins  was   to

marry  the   Queen:  France  proposed  Francis  of   Assisi,  England his   brother  Henry.  Christina  despised  Francis,  who  was  weak in   both   body   and   mind,   and   detested  Henry,   who  had   linked  his name  with  the   progressists.  She  would  have  preferred  a   European prince.   The   two   governments  arranged  to   urge   her   to a   decision.

But   Bresson  and   Bulwer,  who  represented  France  and   England in   Spain,   were  personal  rivals  and   enemies,  and   laboured  against each  other.  Bresson  urged   the   Queen   to   marry   both  her   daughters at   once;   Bulwer  sought   to   prevent  the   Infanta's  marriage, and   to   obtain  Isabella's  hand  for   a   Prince  of   Coburg.  Christina sent  a   message  to   the   father  of   the   Coburg   prince,   proposing  the marriage  (May,  1846).  Guizot  gave  notice  that  if   the  candidature of   the   Bourbons  were  rejected,  France  would  assert  her right   to   act   for   Montpensier;  Aberdeen  censured  Bulwer,  and notified  Guizot  of   the   intrigue.

But  the   Tory   ministry,  to   which  Aberdeen  belonged,  fell   in June,   1846.  Palmerston  took  charge  of   English  foreign  policy and  altered  the   position  of   the   question;  he   declared  England's willingness  to  allow  a  choice  between  three  candidates Isabella's  two  cousins  and   Coburg;  but   he   added  that   the   Spanish government  was  arbitrary  and   that   its   ministers  must  soon  return to  the  constitution  (July   19).   Louis  Philippe  regarded  the agreement  of   1845   as   broken.  Bresson  had   already,  without  instructions, endeavoured  to   accomplish  the   simultaneous  marriage of   Isabella  with  Francis  and   the   Infanta  with  Montpensier;  instead of   disowning  him,   France  continued  the  negotiations. Christina,  who  was   bitterly  opposed  to   English  influence,  induced Isabella  to   accept   Francis.  The  two  marriages  were  announced and  immediately  celebrated.  The  English  government  represented the   affair   as   a   breach  of   faith,   and   declared  the   good   understanding between  England   and   France  at   an  end.

The  Cracow  Affair  (1846). - In   1815   the   Allies  had   made  the Polish  province  of   Cracow  an  aristocratic  republic  governed  by a   Senate  under  Austrian  supervision.  The  destruction  of   the Kingdom  of   Poland  made  Cracow  the  centre  of   the  Polish nationalist  movement;  in   1831   a   "   Society   of   the   Polish  People" was  founded  there,  branches  of   which  were  established  in   the Polish  countries.

The  revolutionary  patriots  decided  to   incite  revolt  in   both Prussian  and  Austrian  Poland  at   once.  But  the   Prussian  police arrested  the   leaders  in   the   plot,   and   the   insurrection  was  confined

to   Galicia.  The   Cracovian  Senate  declared  itself  unable  to   answer for   order,   so   Austria  sent  troops  to   its   support.  The  patriots revolted,   drove   out   the   Austrians,  and,   in   February,  1846, formed  a   provisional  government  which  published  a   manifesto.

The   Austrian  army  returned  quickly  with  crushing  force,   and the   three   monarchies  of   the   East   made  arrangements  to   suppress the   Republic  of   Cracow.  Metternich  announced  in   November that   it   was  annexed  to   Austria,  explaining  that   as   Cracow  had put   an  end   to   her   political   life   with   her   own   hands,   she   had   forfeited herself   to   the   power   to   which   she   had   belonged.  England and  France,  having  just   fallen  out  on  the   Spanish  marriages, merely  protested  in   the   name  of   the   treaties  of   1815.

The   Portuguese  and   Italian  Affairs  (1847). - After  the   Spanish marriages  Louis  Philippe  completed  his  evolution  toward  the autocratic  monarchies  of   the   East.  The  English  government was  isolated  and  began   to   work  alone,  on  opposite  lines  from those  followed  by   the   other  powers.

In   Portugal,  England  interfered  to   end   a   civil   war.  The   English Parliament  passed   a   vote  of   censure  against   Palmerston  for having  violated  the   principle  of   non-intervention.

In   Italy   Palmerston  intervened  to   encourage  the   liberal  and nationalist  movement  and  persuaded  the   princes  to   make  reforms (see   p.   338).   Metternich,  disturbed  by   a   movement  so  palpably hostile  to   Austria,  sent  a   note  to   the   four   great   powers.  He   repeated his   famous  saying   "   Italy,   is   a   geographical  expression," and  asked  if   they   desired  to   maintain  the   treaties  of   1815,   whereby Italy   was   divided  into   independent  sovereign  states.  Palmerston replied   that   the   sovereignty  of   the   Italian  princes   guaranteed them   the   right   to   make  reforms  without  outside  hindrance; that   the   reforms  were  necessary  to   calm   discontent.  He urged   Austria  to   use   her   influence  to   secure  reforms  in   Naples. The  Italian  governments  had  the   impression  that   only   a   pretext was  wanting  for   Austria  to   make  armed  intervention  ; in   October, 1847,   Palmerston,  informed  of   this  impression,  sent  as  special envoy   Lord  Minto,  to   assure  the   King   of   Sardinia  of   England's friendship;  he   brought  about  a   treaty  of   customs  union  between the   Pope,   Tuscany,  and   Sardinia,  and   stopped  the   civil   war   in Sardinia  by   imposing  a   truce  upon   the   King.   The   English   government posed   as   protector   of   the   Italians  against   absolutist Austria. anteed

The  Swiss  Affair  (1847-48).- The  treaties  of   1815   guaranteed the   Constitution  of   Switzerland.  The   Radical  party,   in   propos-

ing   a   revision,  menaced  the   work  of   the   Allies  (see   p.   268) ; it   disturbed the   monarchical  governments  by   its   democratic  domestic policy.  The  King   of   Prussia  wished  to   prevent  the   transformation of   Switzerland  into   a   federal  republic,  which  would  be irreconcilable  with  his   rights   as   the   Prince  of   Neufchatel.

In   1845   Austria,  Prussia,  and   France  had   agreed   on   the   necessity of   preventing  revolution  and  supporting  the  Sonderbund; but   they   had   been  unable  to   agree  on  the   means.  Metternich proposed  an  armed  intervention;  Guizot  a  peaceful  pressure,  for fear   "   of   wounding,  in   all   the   Swiss,   conservative  or  radical,  the feeling  of   national  independence."  Guizot  wished  to  wait  for war  before  interfering,  and  he   desired  joint   action  by   all   the powers  guaranteeing  the   treaties,  including  England.  He   kept the   French  envoy   from  taking   any   hand  in   the   contest.  When the   Diet   prepared  to   vote  the   dissolution  of   the   Sonderbund,  Metternich proposed   to   send   identical  notes   before  the   vote,   in   order to   intimidate  the   deputies.  Guizot  refused  this,   and  contented himself  with  making  some  suggestions  regarding  the   nature  of the   Swiss  union  and  the   treaties  of   1815.   Palmerston  took  advantage of   this   to   play   off   the   four   powers  against   each  other. He   did   not  refuse  to   intervene,  but   he   delayed  negotiations  and secretly  advised  the   Swiss  Diet  to  work  quickly.  While  the powers  were  drafting  an   identical  note  to   impose   peace,  the   Swiss government  determined  upon  war,   November  4.   Palmerston again   gained  time  by   proposing  a  counter  project,  which  the others  refused;  he,   in   his   turn,  refused  that   of   Guizot,  and   the English  agent   in   Switzerland  sent  word  to   General  Dufour  to finish  the   war  as  soon  as  possible.  When  the   identical  note  arrived the   war  was  over.

The  canton  of   Neufchatel,  which  had  remained  neutral,  was condemned  by   the  Diet  to   pay  a   fine;   then  it   made  its   revolt, drove  out  the   Prussian  governor,  and   constituted  itself  as  a  republic, in   1848.  The  King  of   Prussia  protested  vigorously, asked  the   powers  to   intervene,  and   finally   consented  to   leave  the decision  to   a  conference.  The  Revolution  of   1848   interrupted the   affair.

Revolutions  of   1848. - Revolutions  had   begun   in   Switzerland  as early   as   1847,   m   Sicily   in   January,   1848.   The   French  revolution was  not  the   first,   but   by   its   example  it   incited  a   general   movement of   democratic  and  nationalist  insurrections.  The  governments, as   yet   inexperienced  in   the   art  of   repression,  seized  with a   mystical  fear   of   revolution,  a   mysterious  and   incalculable  force,

lost   heart  and   hardly   resisted.  Except  in   the   extreme  West (England,  Spain,  and   Portugal),  Sweden,  Norway,  and  Russia, the   movement  was  produced  all   over  Europe.  In   Belgium,  Holland, and   Denmark  it   took   the   peaceful   form  of   an  electoral  or constitutional  reform.  It   was  an   internal  revolution  in   France (February),  in   Austria  and   Prussia  (March),  in   Germany,  and  in central  Italy.  It   took  the  form  of   a  nationalist  movement, resulting  in   war,   in   northern  Italy,   Schleswig-Holstein,  and Hungary.

The   revolution  upset   all   European  politics   by   transforming  the domestic  condition  of   the   three  central  powers.  It   suddenly withdrew  France  from  the  understanding  with  the  autocratic monarchies  and  paralyzed  Austria  and  Prussia.  England  and Russia  alone  retained  their  liberty  of   action,  and  used  it to   take   the   role   of   arbiters,   but   in   directions  opposed   to   each   other.

At   one  time  it   was  thought  that   the   French  Republic  was  to revive  the   tradition  of   the   war  of   Republican  propagandism.  In Paris  there  was  a   demonstration  in   favour  of   intervention  in Italy   and   Poland.  The  provisional  government  had  determined on  peace,  and   Lamartine  announced  it   to   Europe  by   an  official declaration,  March  5.   But  as  the   belligerent  demonstrations continued  (the   insurrection  of   May   15   was  made  to   demand  intervention in   Poland),  the  revolutionists  of   Europe  continued  to hope   for   aid   from  the   French  revolutionists,  who  might   be brought  into  power   by   a   new  revolution.

Palmerston,  content  with  the  fall   of   Guizot,  recognised  the Republic;  the   other  powers  had  no  time  to   arrange  to   oppose him.  Austria  was  occupied  with  a  revolution  in   Vienna  and   in her   Lombardo- Venetian  Kingdom  (March).  For  the   first  time, Sardinia,  urged   by   the   Italian  nationalist  movement,  dared  to   attack Austria.  After  the   revolt  of   Milan,  the   Sardinian  army entered  Lombardy  without  a   declaration  of   war   (April).  The Austrian  government,  out  of   which  Metternich  had   been   driven, appealed  to   Palmerston  to  restrain  his   ally,   Sardinia.  Palmerston thus   became  arbiter  between  Austria  and   the   Italian states.

When  Austria  had  recovered  her  balance,  Radetzky's  army, which  had  remained  intact  in   the   barracks  and   was  now  re-enforced by   20,000  men,  took  the  offensive,  reoccupied  Venetia, except  Venice,  in   June,   and   then  attacked  the   Sardinian  army. A   single   battle,   Custozza,  July   25,   settled  the   war;   the   Sardinian army   fell   back  and   left   the   whole  of   Lombardy  to   the   Austrians,

## 780  RIVALRY  BETWEEN  RUSSIA   AND   ENGLAND.

Sardinia  asked  assistance  from  France  and  England,  who  agreed to   offer   their   meditation;  a   truce  was  arranged,  and   a   conference to   be   held  at   Brussels;  but  victorious  Austria  refused  any cession  of   territory,  and  the  negotiations  hung   in   suspense. Naples  in   his   war  with  his   subjects  in   Sicily   (September,  1848).

England  also  intervened  to   impose  a   truce  on  the  King   of In   Germany  the   revolution  brought  about  a  national  parliament which,   in   June,   1848,   created  an   imperial   government  (see p.   392).   But   the   new  government  was  not  recognised  by   England, which   opposed   the   commercial  unity   of   Germany,  nor   by France,  which  did   not  want  commercial  unity   without  a   democratic constitution,  nor   by   the   Tsar,   who   abhorred  all   forms  of revolution.

In   the   duchies  of   Schleswig-Holstein  the   revolution,  at   first purely   local,   established  a   German  government  and   led   to   a   national war   between  the   Danes  and   the   people   of   the   duchies - the latter  being   supported  by   German  volunteers,  and   later  by   Prussian troops.   The   Northern  powers  were  inclined  to   support  the Danes,  England  in   order  to  prevent  the   creation  of   a   German navy,  the   Tsar  from  hatred  of   revolution  and   because  the   King of   Denmark  was  his   kinsman.  England,  Russia,  and  Sweden organized  the   London  Conference,  which  imposed  a   truce  and   a provisional  solution  (see   p.   570).

The  Restorations  (1849). - Austria,  the   power  most  shaken  by the  revolution  of   '48,   set  the  example  of   military  reaction. Prince  Schwarzenberg  took  charge  of   Austrian  affairs  and laboured  to   destroy  th'e   work  of   the   revolutionists.

The  restoration  was  begun   by   Austria  in   October,  1848;   the King   of   Prussia  followed  the   example  in   Prussia  in   December. The  progress  of   reaction  was   interrupted  by   the   Hungarian  revolution and   by   the   attempt  to   constitute  a   German  Empire  under the   King   of   Prussia.

In   Italy   the   republicans  took  advantage  of   this   to   establish a   republic   in   central  Italy,   in   February,  1849;   Sardinia  to   renew hostilities.  The  Austrian  army,   however,  attacked  the   Sardinian army,  and  the   single   combat  of   Novara  (March,  1849)   was  sufficient to   scatter  it   and   force   Sardinia  to   ask   for   peace.   Austria demanded  the  suppression  of   the  Italian  republics;  she   herself undertook  the  management  of   Tuscany.  For  Rome  the   intervention was   much   slower  ; the   Catholic  states  disputed  as   to   who should  undertake  it.  France  took  the   task  upon   herself,  in   order to   check  Austria  (see   p.   345).   But   the   majority  in   the   French

Assembly  wanted  the   restoration  of   the   Pope,   while  the   President desired  to   restore  Rome  only   when  reformed  in   lay   matters  and with   the   consent  of   the   inhabitants.  This  discord  showed  itself in   contradictory  military  operations.  The  French  expedition announced  on   landing  that   it   had   come  to   prevent  Austrian  intervention and   fraternized  with  the   soldiers  of   the   Roman  Republic. It   found  Rome  barred  against  it,   however,  and,   after attempting  a   surprise,  was  driven  back.  Then  came  to   the Pope's   aid   armies   from   Naples,   Spain,   and   Austria;  the   Austrians occupied  Romagna.  The  French  agent,  de   Lesseps,  arranged a   compromise  with   the   Romans  on   May   31,   but   the   French  government rejected   it.   The   French  army,  with  re-enforcements, finally   besieged  Rome  and   forced  it   to   capitulate.  The   restoration was   complete;  President  Louis  Napoleon  signified  his   dissatisfaction in   a   public   letter. public.

In   Germany  the   conflict  between  the   democrats  and   the   governments turned   into   insurrection.  The   King   of   Prussia  accomplished the   restoration  by   means  of   his   armies  in   Baden  and   in Saxony;  the   Frankfort  Parliament  dispersed.  The  question  of the   duchies  was  revived  at   the   expiration  of   the   truce,   but   the King   of   Prussia  had   enough   of   this   war,  and   undertook  personal charge   of   the   negotiations  ; the   conference,  transferred  to   Berlin, could  not  arrange  a   definite  settlement  and  confined  itself  to   a truce  (see   p.   570).

In   Hungary,  where  the   revolution  had   set  up   a   republic,  the restoration  was  accomplished  by   a   regular  war  against  the   Hungarian army   (see   p.   419).   Austria,   threatened  with   a   renewed  invasion by   the   Hungarians,  appealed  to  the   Tsar;   and   it   was  a Russian  army  that  conquered  Hungary.

Nicholas  had  posed   as  a   restorer  of   legitimate  monarchy.  Palmerston  posed   as  protector  of   revolutionary  patriots.  Five  thousand Hungarians  had  taken  refuge  in   Turkey;  Austria  and Prussia  insisted  upon   their  extradition.  Palmerston  induced  the Sultan  to   refuse  this.  The   two   Emperors  threatened,  and   broke off   their   diplomatic  relations  with  the   Sultan,   but   in   the   end   had to   be   content  with  the   expulsion  of   the   refugees  from  Turkey. The  Sultan  imprisoned  about  thirty   of   them,   whose  release  Palmerston accomplished  after   two  years'   of   negotiating.  England also  protested  against  the   treatment  of   political  prisoners  in   the Kingdom  of   Naples.

Austria's  Triumph  over  Prussia  (1850).- Austria,  busy   with Italy   and   Hungary,  had   left   the   King   of   Prussia  to   work   his   will

## 782  RIVALRY  BETWEEN  RUSSIA   AND  ENGLAND.

in   German  affairs;  he   had   put   down  the   insurrections,  organized the   Union  (see   p.   397),   and   taken  up   the   question  of   the   duchies. But  Austria  and  Russia  were  agreed  to  make  the  restoration complete  by   destroying  Prussia's  work.

The  King  of   Prussia  found  himself  divided  by   two  contradictory sentiments:  from  German  patriotism  he   supported  the Germans  in   the   duchies;  from  self-respect  he   held  to   the   Union, since  Austria  wished  to   destroy  it;   but   his   respect   for   legitimacy kept   him   from  interesting  himself  in   subjects   who  revolted  against their  sovereign  and  in   a  constitution  voted  by   a  revolutionary parliament.  He   agreed  to   change  the   constitution  of   the   Union, but   by   a   conference  between  Prussia  and   Austria  without  interference from   the   Diet,   which  he   regarded  as   dissolved.  The Austrian  government  insisted  on  referring  matters  to  the   Diet; it   did   not   wish   to   make  war  on   Prussia  single-handed,  but   was trying   to   draw  Russia  and   the   German  states  into   it.

Schwarzenberg's  policy,  summed  up   in   the   famous  epigram: "   Humiliate  Prussia,  then  destroy  her,"   consisted  in   compromising the   King   of   Prussia  with   the   Tsar  by   compelling  him   to declare  himself  opposed  to  restoration.  Nicholas,  though  displeased with   the   King   of   Prussia  for   having   given   a   "   democratic "   constitution  to   his   people,   and   also   favorable  to   the   King of   Denmark,  wished,  nevertheless,  to   avert  war  between  the   two conservative  monarchies  of   Germany.  He   promised  his   support to   the   one  that   remained  faithful  to   the   treaties  of   1815. cratic

The  Berlin  Conference  failed  to  settle  the   question  of   the duchies.  England  and  France  *   insisted  that   it   should  be   settled. All   the   powers  were  inclined  to   return  to   the   arrangements  existing prior   to   1848.   The   King   of   Prussia,  in   alarm,   decided  to desert  the   Germans  in   the   duchies,  and   made  the   Treaty   of   Berlin, July   2.   The   conference  was  transferred  to   London.  England, France,  and  Russia  pledged  themselves  to   maintain  the   integrity of   the   Danish  monarchy,  thus  giving   the   question  of   the   duchies a   European  interest.  They   later  solved  the   problem  of   the   succession (1852)   by   a   permanent  union  of   Denmark  with  the duchies.

Then  Austria,  approaching  the   question  of   the   Union,  asked the   King   of   Prussia  to   declare  null  the   Constitution  of   Erfurt. The  King   perceived  that  this   constitution  was   impracticable,  but

*   Napoleon's  attempts  to  profit   by   the  disunion  between  Prussia  and Austria,  his  sending  of   Persigny  in   1849,   an&lt;i  h*8   conversation  with  the Prussian  ambassador  in   1850,   had  no  practical  effect.

he   did   not   wish   to   abandon  the   principle.  Schwarzenberg  mobilized his   forces,  the   Kings   of   Wurtemburg  and  Bavaria  joined Austria  against  Prussia;  the   three  sovereigns  had  an   interview in   October,  in   which  a   martial  toast  was  drunk.

The  Prussian  government  divided  into  two  parties,  one  for peace,  the   other  for   mobilization.  The  King   first  let   his   ministry decide   by   majority  for   peace   (Prince  William  was  one  of the  minority);  then,  on   learning  that  Austria  was  bringing troops  into  Bavaria,  he   ordered  mobilization.  The  war  was thought  to   be  begun;  there  was  even  a  skirmish.  Then Schwarzenberg  (November  5)   demanded  the   withdrawal  of   the Prussian  troops.  The  King   obeyed;  and,   yielding  on  the   question of   the   Union,  he   had   it   declared  dissolved  by   his   allies.  He mer  'y   asked  to   be   intrusted  with  the   execution  of   the   decisions of   the   Diet   in   Holstein  and   in   Hesse  (his   object   was  to   support the   people   of   Hesse  in   maintaining  their  constitution).  Austria refused,  and   the   Tsar  supported  her.

The  King   of   Prussia,  isolated  and   distressed,  again   gave  way; he   asked  an   interview  with   Schwarzenberg.  This  was  the   famous Olmiitz  interview,  November  28,   1850  - the   symbol  of   Prussia's humiliation.  The  Prussian  envoy  promised  disarmament. Prussia  obtained  in   return  only   the   promise  of   a   conference, which  was  held  at   Dresden  in   1851,   and   led   to   nothing  but   certain exchanges  of   notes.

There  remained  nothing  of   Prussia's  plans.  Germany,  having seen   her   publicly   give   way,   long   retained  the   impression  that she   had   not  the   strength   to   resist   Austria.

Recognition  of   the   French  Empire  (1852).- The   restoration  of the   monarchical  system   in   France  was  welcomed  by   the   great powers.  The  Tsar  approved  the   coup   d'etat,  though  protesting beforehand  against  the   title  of   emperor.  Austria  even  accepted the   title   of   emperor,   "   however  injurious   it   may   seem  to   the   dignity of   the   old   dynasties  to   yield   an  equal   rank   to   an   individual like  Louis  Napoleon."  In   England  Palmerston  approved  the coup   d'etat;   and   it   was  the   occasion  of   a   conflict  with   his   colleagues and   the   Queen,   who   reproached  him   with   having   acted contrary  to   the   decisions  adopted   by   the   Cabinet.  The   King   of Prussia,  though  ill   disposed  toward  the   usurper,  followed  the example  of   the   other  governments.

The  proclamation  of   the   Empire  reopened  the   French  question. The   treaties  of   1815   and   1818   excluded  forever  the   Bonaparte family   from   the   throne  of   France;  the   accession  of   a   Naparte

poleon  was,  therefore,  a  casus  belli.  The  numeral  adopted  by Napoleon  (III.)  aggravated  the  violation  of   the  treaties  by counting  as  a   legitimate  sovereign  Napoleon  II.,   who  had   never been  recognised  by   the  Allies.  But  the  advantage  of   seeing France  once  more  a  monarchy  decided  the   governments  to   accept the   new  empire;   Napoleon  III.,   like   Louis  Philippe,  had formally  assured  them  of   his   intention  to   maintain  peace.

The  four  great   powers  contented  themselves  with  announcing in   December,  1852,   that   they   would  accept   Napoleon's  promises of   peace  and   continue  to   maintain  the   status  quo.   After  this   the English  government,  followed  by   all   the   rest,   recognised  the   Empire. But   the   Tsar   would  grant   only   the   title   "   good   friend/' saying   that   the   Russian  court  said   "   dear   brother  "   only   to   those sovereigns  whose  claim  rested  on  the   same  principle  as  that  of the   Tsar.

Napoleon,  though  recognised,  was  not  admitted  to  equality with  the   princes  of   Europe.  When  he   wanted  to  marry,  no princely  house,  not  even  the  Vasas,  nor  the  HohenzollernSigmaringen,  was  willing  to   give   him   a   daughter.  He   decided, in   1853,   to   marry   Eugenie   de   Montijo,   belonging  to   an  old   family of   the   Spanish   nobility.

The  Tsar  and   the   Eastern  Question  (1852-53). - Nicholas,  having restored  order  in   the   East,   wished  to   settle  the   Eastern  question. He   felt   himself  able   to   count  on   the   docility   of   Austria and   Prussia;  he   had   only   to   come  to   an  agreement  with   England. He   had   not  wished  to   treat  with   Palmerston,  the   patron  of   revolutionists. But   a   coalition  ministry,   under  Aberdeen,  having succeeded  to  power  in   1852,   he   renewed  the   proposition  which he   had  made  without  success  in   1844   to  the  Peel  ministry, namely,  that  England  and  Russia  should  settle  the   Eastern  question together.  He   told   the   English   ambassador  that   "   the   sick man  "   (Turkey)  was  dying   and  that  he   believed  the   moment  at hand  to   arrange  with  England  for   his   burial;  for   his   own  part, he   had   decided  to   occupy   Constantinople  as  a   pledge,   but   not  to keep   it.   He   then  offered  Egypt   and   Crete  to   England.

The  English  government,  as  always  before,  supported  the   Ottoman Empire.  The  English  ambassador  to   Constantinople, Stratford  Canning,  was  personally  hostile  to   Russia,  and   encouraged the   Sultan   to   resist   the   Tsar.  Since  1850   a   conflict  for   the possession  of   the   Holy   Places  had   been  raging   between  the   Catholics, under   French  protection,  and   the   Orthodox  (or   Greek Church)  believers,  under  Russian  protection  (see   p.   626).   The aged

Turkish  government,  pressed  by   the   two  rival  states,  had   tried to   escape  trouble  by   granting  the   demands  of   both  (January, 1852);  but   the   two  grants  were  contradictory.  France  and Russia  both  demanded  a  solution,  each  in   accordance  with  its own  document;  both  threatened  the   Sultan  with  force.

The   Tsar,   under  pretext  of   settling   the   question,  sent  a   special envoy,  Menschikoff,  who  arrived  in   Constantinople  in   April, 1853,   with   a   grand   escort  and   the   airs   of   a   master.  The   English ambassador  knew  that  he   had   come  to   conclude  a   special   treaty that  should  recognise  the   Tsar  as  the   protector  of   Orthodox churches  throughout  the   Turkish  Empire.  He   therefore  advised the   Porte  to   decide  the   question  of   the   Holy   Places  as   Russia wished, - which  was   done,  - and   to   reject   the   treaty   for   the   guarantees of   the   Greek  Church.  Menschikoff  then  presented  an ultimatum.  The  Sultan  refused,  and,   in   May,   Menschikoff  withdrew, severing   diplomatic  relations.

The  Tsar  was  annoyed  and  wanted  to   declare  war,   but  his ministry  advised  peace.  As   a  compromise  the   Tsar  accepted  a halfway  measure.  He   sent  an  army,   in   July,   to   occupy  the   Roumanian principalities,  but   without  declaring  war  on   the   Sultan. This  was  a   means  of   coercion  that   he   had   tried  before.  It   now stirred  up   public   opinion  in   England  and  displeased  Austria. The  governments  of   the   great   powers,  not  as  yet   disposed  to   war, arranged  a   note  of   conciliation.  The   Tsar  accepted  it,   but   Stratford Canning   persuaded  the   Sultan  to   demand  a   change   in   terminology, which   the   Tsar   refused   (September).

At   the   Sultan's  request  the   English   and   French  fleets  entered the   Straits,  contrary  to   the   convention  of   1841.  Russia  protested. England   replied   that   Turkey,   since   the   occupation  of the   principalities,  was  no   longer   at   peace.   The   Sultan  ordered the   Turkish  army   to   cross  the   Danube  and   declared  war  on   the Tsar  (November  4).   The  Eastern  question  was  opened  again; but   the   Sultan  was  not  alone  in   the   face   of   the   Tsar.  For   the first   time   since  1815   the   great   powers  were  to   make   war.   The European  concert  was  definitely  at   an  end.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.

For   bibliography  and  complete  histories  see  under  chap.   xxv.

DOCUMENTS.- For  Austrian  policy,  Metternich  (see   bibliog.  of   chap, xxv).- For  English  policy,  L.   Bulwer,  "The  Life   of   Viscount  Palmerston," 3   vols.,  1871-74,  Palmerston's  letters,  connected  by   historical  text; Malmesbury,  "   Memoirs  of   an  ex-Minister,"  3   vols.,  1885   ;   Loftus,   "   Diplom.

Reminiscences,  1837-62,"  2   vols.,  1892;   Urquhart,  "   The   Portfolio,"  6   vols., 1836,   Fr.   edit.  5   vols.,  1837,   anti-Russian  policy. - For   French  policy, Guizot,  "   Memoires,"  8   vols.,  1858-67. - For   Prussian  policy,  Kanke,  "   Aus dem  Briefwechsel  Friedrich  Wilhelms  IV.  mit  Bunsen,"  1873. - For  the Coburg  policy,  Stockmar,  "   Denkwiirdigkeiten,"  1872,  extracts  from  the papers  of   the   Coburgs*  confidant  ;   Th.   Martin,  "   Life   of   the   Prince  Consort," 5   vols.,   1875-85,  an  authorized  biography  of   Prince  Albert.

WORKS.-  Flathe,  "   Zeitalter  der   Restaur.  u.   d.   Revol.,"  1884   (Oncken coll.,   see   bibliog.  of   chap,   xxv.),   is   the   only   complete  history. - The  most important  national  histories  for   foreign  policy  are  Walpole  (England), Hillebrand,  Thureau-Dangin,  Taxile  Delord  (France);  Treitschke  (Germany); Springer  (Austria);  Reuchlin  and  Bianchi  (Italy);  Baumgarten  (Spain); Eosen  (Turkey);  Juste  (Belgium);  Henne  am  Rhyn   (Switzerland).

EPISODES.- For  the  Belgian,  Polish,  Italian,  and  Portuguese  wars,  see the   "Catal.  du   Depot   de   la   Guerre."- For  the   Austrian  war  of   1848-49  in Lombardy,  Schoenhals,  "   Campagnes  d'ltalie  de   1848   et   1849,"  Fr.   trans., 1859   (originally  an  anonymous  publication:  "   Erinnerungen  ernes  Oesterr. Veteranen  .  .  .,"1852). - For  the  conflict  between  Prussia  and  Austria, H.   von   Sybel,   "Die  Begriindung  des  Deutschen  Reiches,"  vols.  i-iii.,  4th edit.,  1893,   personal  information  and  extracts  from  Prussian  archives which  are  still   secret. - On   the   recognition  of   Napoleon  by   Europe,  "   Der Staatsstreich  vom  2   Dec.  1851   und  seine  Riickwirkung  auf   Europa,"  1870 (the   anonymous  author  is   Geffcken). - For   the   complications  in   the   Orient, see   the   bibl.   of   the   following  chapter.

## CHAPTER   XXVII.

## FRENCH    PREPONDERANCE    AND    THE    NATIONALIST    WARS; 1854-70.

Transformations  in   European  Policy. - The   period   from  1844   to 1854   had   been  a   period  of   internal  revolution  and  external peace;  in   40   years  there  had   been  no  great   European  war,  no change  in   the   Europe   of   1815   but   the   creation  of   the   two   little kingdoms  of   Greece  and  Belgium  and  the  destruction  of   the Republic  of   Cracow.  With  the  Crimean  war  began  a  period of   wars  and  territorial  changes:  in   16   years  there  were  four European  wars  between  great  powers,  not  to  mention  the local  wars  in   Italy   and  Denmark;  all   central  Europe  was rearranged.

This  change  was  produced  by   the  arrival  in   power  of   new rulers  in   France  and   Prussia,  the   two  great  powers  which  had hitherto  remained  inactive,  and  in   Sardinia,  a  secondary  state, which,  in   these  years,  raised  itself  to   the   rank  of   a   European power.

In   France,  Napeoleon  III.,   invested  with  the   power  of   declaring war  and   concluding  treaties  independently  of   the   Chamber and  of   public   opinion,  was  absolute  master  of   foreign  policy. His  army  was  thought  very  strong,  and  he   did   not  shrink  from the   idea  of   war.  By   suppression  of   her   political  life   at   home, France  became  a  preponderating  force  in   Europe.  But  Napoleon III.   directed  this   force   according  to   his   personal   views.  He abandoned  the   monarchical  tradition  of   a   policy   of   peace  and   national interest.  Formerly  an   Italian  revolutionist  and   a   partisan of   Italian  unity,   he   leaned  toward  a   revolutionary  policy.   Openly hostile  to   the   treaties  of   1815   and   to   Austria  also,   advocating the   right   of   peoples   to   determine  their   own  political   fortunes,  he wished  to   destroy  the   work  of   the   Allies.  He   wished  to   employ France  in   the   disinterested  work  of   helping   the   oppressed  nationalities to  emancipate  themselves,  expecting  as  recompense  some increase  of   territory  for   France - what  Bismarck  ironically called  a   pourboire   (waiter's   tip).   This   was   the   " policy   of   nation-

alities,"  combined  with  a   policy   of   annexations.  But   Napoleon's personal  adherents  were  divided  into  two   hostile  parties :   the   revolutionary party,   directed  by   Prince  Jerome,  urged   intervention on   behalf  of   nationalism  and  a  war  against  Austria;  the   conservative party,   represented  by   the   Empress,  wanted  peace  and maintenance  of   the   Catholic  powers.  Napoleon,  subject  to   personal influences,   hesitated,  wavered  from  one  party   to   the   other, took  contradictory  measures;  sometimes  he   even  concealed  his actions  from  his   ministers,  and   took,   through  secret  agents,  steps opposed  to   the   official  line   of   conduct  decided  on   by   his   government. This   gave   his   policy   an   incoherent  and   tortuous  appearance.

In   Sardinia,  the   new   King,   Victor  Emmanuel,  had   a   small  but efficient  army.  He  left  the   direction  of   his   foreign  policy   to Cavour  (see   p.   348),   an   Italian  patriot   who  was   determined  to achieve  Italian  unity   by   any   and   all   means.

Prussia  remained  passive  until  William  I.   succeeded  to   the throne.  Although  personally  a   lover  of   peace,  like  his   two predecessors,  William  was  before  everything  commander  of   the army,  and   might   be   persuaded  to   face   a   war.  After  1862  he   left the  direction  of   his   foreign  policy  to   Bismarck,  a   German patriot,   who   had   determined  to   secure  German  unity   by   force  of arms.  Now  the  Prussian  army,  by   its   universal  service,  perfected armament,  rapid   mobilization,  and   skilful  tactics,  was  to show  itself  the   strongest  army   in   Europe.

In   face   of   these   three   powers  which  were  beginning  to   act,   the powers  which  had  controlled  Europe  were  reduced  to   a   passive role.  Austria,  weakened  by   Hungarian  nationalist  opposition and  disturbed  by   financial  complications,  had  only   a   defensive policy.  Emperor  Francis  Joseph,  who*  conducted  her  foreign affairs,   had   no   love   for   war.  He   was,   however,  unable  to   avoid it,   and   went   into   it   under  unfavourable  conditions,  with   an  army ill   equipped,  ill   commanded,  and  slow  in   its   movements.  In Russia  Nicholas  had  been  succeeded,  in   1855,   by   Alexander,  a humane  and  peace-loving  prince,  who  reigned  twenty  years  without making   war   in   Europe.  In   England  Palmerston  continued to   manage  foreign  affairs  until  his   death  in   1865,   but   his   measures of   intimidation  no   longer   influenced  powers  that  had   decided on   war.  .England,  with  her   small  army  of   volunteers, could  not   fight   against  the   continental  armies,  with  their  compulsory military   service.  The  English  government  resigned itself  to   the   impotence  which  was  now  plain   to   the   eyes  of   the

world.  It   abstained  from  military  policy,   except  where  a   vital English  interest  was  to   be   defended.

Europe  was  led,   during  this  period,  by   France,  Italy,   and Prussia, - in   other  words,  by   Napoleon,  Cavour,  and   Bismarck, and  her   policy   depended  upon  their  relations.  All   three  had a   common  ground  of   interest,  the   principle  of   nationalities  and opposition  to   Austria.  The  former  European  concert  rested  on the   "   maintenance  of   the   treaties,"  but   the   revolutions  of   '48,   by realizing  for   a   moment  the   new  nations,  Italian,  German,  and Hungarian,  had  shaken  the  system  that  the   treaties  had  established. They   had   brought   up   new  questions  of   nationality  all over  central  Europe.  The  reaction  had  crushed  the   nationalist movements  without  solving  these  problems.  They   were  to   come up   again;   but   this   time  the   conservative  power,   Austria,  found itself  alone  against   Napoleon,  Cavour,  and   Bismarck,  who  had become  allies  of   nationalist  revolution.

The  Crimean  War  (1853-56). - The  war  between  the   Sultan  and the   Tsar,   instead  of   remaining  localized  as   in   1828,   became  a European  war.  Napoleon  III.,   desiring  to   make  himself  a   position in   Europe,  had   joined   the   English  government  to   defend  the Ottoman  Empire.  France  and  England  had  together  sent  their fleets  to   Constantinople.  The  Russian  fleet,   crossing  the   Black Sea,   came  to   destroy  the   Turkish  fleet  at   Sinope,   November  30, 1853.  In   England  public   indignation  was  aroused  against  the Aberdeen  ministry  and  Prince  Albert,  who  desired  to   maintain peace;  the   English   did   not  want  to   leave   the   Russians  masters  of the   Black  Sea.  The  English  government  decided  to   accept   Napoleon's propositions.   The   united  English   and   French  fleets entered  the   Black  Sea,   in   January,  1854,   with   orders  to   request the   withdrawal  of   all   Russian  ships   to   Sebastopol.  The   Tsar   was displeased,  and   determined  to   break  with   France  and   England.

The  rupture  was  retarded  by   negotiations  with   the   two   German states.  France  and   England  finally   demanded  the   withdrawal of   the   Russian  troops   from  the   Roumanian  principalities, which  the   Tsar  refused.  They   then  concluded  a   treaty  with   the Sultan,  promising  him  the   aid   of   an  army  and   engaging  not   to treat  separately  (March  12).   On   March  27   they   declared  war on   Russia,  and   on   April   10  agreed   not  to   seek   any   individual advantage  in   the   war.  They   invited  the   other  powers  to   join them;  the   King   of   Prussia  refused  from  aversion  to   the   revolutionary projects   of   Napoleon   and   Palmerston;  in   order   to   keep Austria  neutral,  he   promised  to   support   her   in   case  of   attack.

The  Allies  were  at   first   unwilling  to   free   the   Roumanian  provinces from   the   Russian  occupation  because  this   would  remove Austria's  sole  motive  for   joining   against  the   Tsar.  They   confined themselves  to   a   defensive  war.  A   small  Franco-English army  was  sent  to   Gallipoli  to   defend  Constantinople,  and  an  expedition was   sent   to   the   Piraeus  to   check  the   Greeks.  As   the Russians  did  not  advance,  the  army  re-embarked,  and  at  the request  of   the   Turks  proceeded  to   Varna;  thence  to   the   Dobrudja, where  it   was   decimated  by   cholera.  These  operations  were  conducted slowly   and   confusedly.

The  Tsar  still   hesitated;  he   tried   to   conciliate  his   former  allies, Prussia  and  Austria.  He  finally  evacuated  Roumania,  thus leaving  no  motive  for   war.  But   France  and   England  wanted  to assure  the   future;  they   arranged  with  Austria  "points"  to   impose on   the   Tsar:   I.   The   Roumanian  principalities  to   be   under European  guarantee,  instead  of   Russian;  2.   free  navigation  of the   Danube;  3.   revision  of   the   Straits  Convention  to   neutralize the  Black  Sea;   4.   protection  of   the  Sultan's  Christian  subjects without  injury   to   his   sovereignty  (August  8).   Russia rejected  the   four  "   points,"   declaring  that  she   would  await  the progress  of   events.  The   Austrians  and   Turks  occupied  the   Roumanian provinces   in   September.

The  defensive  war  was  at   an  end.  Napoleon  proposed  to   incite revolt   in   the   Caucasus;  England   preferred  to   attack  Sebastopol,   Russia's  military  seaport  on  the   Black  Sea.  Thus  the   war for   the   protection  of   the   Ottoman  Empire  led   to   an  expedition against  the   Crimea.

The  Russians  were  not  expecting  an  attack  from  this   direction; they   had   stationed  200,000  men  on   the   Baltic  Sea,   140,000  in   Poland, 180,000   on   the   Danube,  and   only   50,000   in   the   Crimea. The  little  Russian  army  could  not  prevent  the   landing  of   the allies,   but   it   was   intrenched  on  steep   ground,  and   the   battle  of Alma,  September  30,  was  so   bloody  that  the   Franco-English army  gave  the   garrison  of   Sebastopol  time  to   improve  the   defences of   the   place   by   scuttling  the   ships   in   the   bay   and   raising earthworks.  The  French  general  Canrobert,  when  he   reached Sebastopol,  did   not  venture  an  assault;  he   conducted  a   regular siege.

It   was  a  slow  and   murderous  siege,   which  absorbed  all   the forces  of   the   allies.  The   besieging  army   had   been  attacked  by cholera,  which  delayed  their  operations.  When  they   were  ready for   the   assault,  a   Russian  army  came  to   the   assistance  of   the   city

and   forced   them   to   fight   on   the   plain   and   in   the   valleys   the   bloody battles   of   Inkermann  and   Balaklava,  in   November,  1854.   The allies   had   to   face   a   winter  campaign  in   a   desert  country,  in   intense cold;   nothing   had   been   prepared.  The  English  army, poorly  sheltered  and   provisioned,  lost   half   of   its   numbers.  English opinion   was  aroused,  and   insisted  on   the   resignation  of   the Aberdeen  ministry.

The   allies   sent   new  troops  and   were  re-enforced  by   a   Turkish army  which  on   its   arrival  fought   at   Eupatoria,  February,  1855. Sardinia  sent  an  army  corps.  Sardinia  joined   the   war  in   January to   please   the   Western  powers  and   flatter  Napoleon.  Austria also   had   concluded  an  offensive  alliance  in   the   preceding  month, and   urged   Prussia  and   the   Diet  to   prepare  for   war.  But   the Diet,   though  hitherto  obedient  to   Austria,  refused  to   move,  and Austria  dared  not  act  alone.

All   at   once   Nicholas  died   (March   2,   1855),   from   chagrin,   it   was said,   at   being   conquered  by   the   Turks.  The   war   had   no   further purpose,  and  negotiations  for   its   termination  were  opened  at Vienna.  The  negotiations  failed  because  Alexander  refused  the third  point,   to   limit   the   number  of   Russian  war  vessels  on  the Black  Sea,   to   which  England  clung  obstinately.  The  allies therefore  completed  the  siege   of   Sebastopol;  a   bombardment was  still   necessary  (250,000  cannon  shots,   8000  killed,   in   April)  a   battle  (Tchernaia,  in   May),  - the   attack  on  the   Mamelon  fort (in   June;   13,000  killed), - an  -unsuccessful  assault, - a  second bombardment, - an  assault  on  the   Malakoff.  The  Russians  destroyed everything,   then   evacuated  the   place   (September).

The  allies,   masters  of   Sebastopol,  did   not   know  how  to   force the   Tsar   to   peace.   Napoleon  proposed  to   excite  nationalist  wars in   Poland,  Finland,  and   the   Caucasus,  or   to   make  a   naval  war   by blockading  the   Baltic.  But   the   Anglo-French  fleet  in   the   Baltic in   1854   and   1855   had   been   able   to   bombard  only   isolated  points; Sweden  did  not  dare  enter  the   war.  England  desired  only   a limited  war.  Napoleon  decided  in   November  to  make  peace, against  the   wishes  of   Palmerston,  who   threatened  to   continue  the war  alone  with  the   Turks.  Austria  undertook  to   present  to   the Tsar  an  ultimatum  containing  four  points,  which  the   Tsar  accepted in   January,  1856,   and  the   powers  concerned  decided  to arrange  the   conditions  of   peace   in   a   congress  at   Paris.

The  Congress  of   Paris  (1856). - The  Congress  of   Paris,  in March  and  April,  1856,   was  composed  of   two  plenipotentiaries from  each  of   the   six   powers,   France,  England,  Russia,  Turkey,

Austria,  and   Sardinia,  under  the   presidency  of   the   French  plenipotentiaries; Prussia   was  afterward  invited  to   join.

The  Congress  began   by   settling  the   Eastern  question.

1.   The   integrity  of   the   Ottoman  Empire  was  guaranteed  by the   powers;  the   Sultan  promised  reforms  (see   p.   626),   and   the powers  renounced  any  right   of   intervention  in   the   internal  affairs of   the   Empire.
2.   The   Danube  was  declared  open  to  navigation;  a  commission of   representatives  from  the   seven  powers  was  to   take  measures to   make   the   river   navigable  and   establish  tolls   to   cover  the expenses;  the   supervision  was  then  to   pass   into   the   hands  of   a commission  from  the   bordering  states.

3.   The   Black  Sea   was   declared  neutral,  and   no  state  was  to have  on   its   coast  any   maritime  arsenals  nor  any  vessels  of   war, beyond  the   number,  not  to   exceed  ten,   of   small  ships   requisite for   policing   the   coasts.

4.   Moldavia  and   Wallachia  became  self-governing  (see   p.   640). After  signing  the   peace,  the   Congress  regulated  the   question of   maritime  law   by   four   decisions  which  became  part   of   European international  law:  I.   Privateering  is   abolished;  2.   All   enemy property,  other  than  contraband,  carried  under  a  neutral  flag   is exempt  from  capture;  3.   all   neutral  merchandise  under  the enemy's  flag   is   similarly  exempt;  4.   blockade  may  not   be   established by   a   simple   declaration;  it   is   valid   only   when  effective.

Cavour,  representing  Sardinia,  succeeded  in   bringing  up   the Italian  question  in   the   Congress  by   making  terms  with  the   representatives of   France  and  England.  These  spoke  of   the   evacuation of   the   Pirseus  by   the   French  troops,  and   used  the   occasion thus  afforded  to   bring   up   the   continued  occupation  of   Tuscany by   the   Austrians;  England  asked  that  it   should  cease.  Austria refused  to   discuss  the  matter.  But  Cavour  took  advantage of   this  opportunity  to   describe  the  lamentable  condition  of Italy.

Napoleon's  Predominance  (1856-59). - The  Congress  of   Paris had   been  a   personal  success  for   Napoleon  and   his   policy.  Not only   had   he   gained   the   admission  of   France  into   the   European concert,  but   for   the   first   time   he   had   had   a   European  congress meet  on   his   territory  and   under  his   presidency.  He   had   secured autonomy  for  the  Roumanians  and  brought  up   the  Italian nationalist  question,  making  the  instrument  Metternich  had created  against  the   nationalities  serve  in   the   nationalist  cause. He   was  attached  to   this   idea,   and   his   policy   aimed  at   the   calling   of

a   new  congress  to   make  over  Europe   and   abolish  the   treaties  of 1815;   but   without  success.

^ The  Congress  of   Paris  changed  Napoleon's  position  in Europe.  The  sovereigns,  seeing   him  firm  at   home  and   powerful abroad,  made  advances  to   him.  The  example  was  set   by   the princes  of   the   Coburg   family;   Ernest  of   Coburg-Gotha  was  the first   to   make   him   a   visit;   after   him   came  Leopold,  King   of   the Belgians,  then   the   King   of   Portugal;  finally   Prince  Albert,  consort of   Queen  Victoria,  consented  to   see   Napoleon,  in   September, 1854.  Napoleon  and  the   Empress  went  to   England  the   following April,   and   Victoria  and   Albert  returned  their  visit  - the   first time  since  1422  that  an   English  sovereign  had  visited  Paris. The  Coburg  example  decided  Victor  Emmanuel,  who  had hitherto  refused.  After  the   Congress  of   1856   the   sovereigns  of Wurtemburg,  Bavaria,  and  Tuscany  visited  France.

Napoleon  wished  to   use  these  relations  to   take  up   an  active policy   again.  He   sought   to   gain   the   King   of   Prussia,  but   failed; in   August,  1857,   he   spoke   to   the   English   ministry   of   revising   the treaties  of   1815,   but   was  coldly   received.  He   then  approached Russia,  having  an   interview  with  the   Tsar  at   Stuttgart  in   October, 1857.   In   1858   France  and   Russia  worked  together  for   Roumanian unity   against   Turkey,   Austria,  and   England;  in   Servia they   combined  to   support  the   Obrenovitch  against  Austria.

Alliance  between  France  and  Sardinia  (1858). - Cavour,  who had  decided  to  make  war  on   Austria,  declared  publicly  to   the Chamber  that  the   principles  of   Vienna  and   those  of   Turin  were irreconcilable.  In   May,   1856,   Austria  replied   that   the   Emperor would  continue  to  use   his   right   of   intervention.  The  following year   (March,  1857)   the   Austrian  government  severed  diplomatic relations  with  Sardinia.

Napoleon  still  hesitated.  Orsini,  a   Mazzinist,  in   January, 1858,   attempted  to   kill   him   for   having   failed  to   keep   the   oath   he had  sworn  in   his   youth   to   work  for   the   independence  of   Italy. The  attempt  made  a  great   impression  on   Napoleon;  he   had Orsini's  letter  published  (see   p.   351).   He   then   sent   for   Cavour, and  the   two,  meeting  secretly  at   Plombieres,  concluded  an  alliance and   prepared   for   war   (July,   1858).   The   practical  conditions were  soon  arranged:  all   the   Austrian  possessions  in   Italy for   Sardinia,  Savoy   for   France;  and   eventually  Parma  and   Modena  for   Sardinia,  and   in   this   case   Nice   for   France.  But   they had  difficulty  in   arranging  a   pretext   for   the   war;   Napoleon  was unwilling  to   appear   in   support  of   a   revolution.  As   the   price   of tions

the   alliance,  Victor  Emmanuel  gave   Princess  Clotilde  in   marriage to   Prince  Jerome,   the   Emperor's  cousin,  a  partisan  of nationalist  schemes.  Napoleon  hoped  to  profit   by   the   nationalist uprisings   in   Italy   to   give   Tuscany   to   his   cousin,   and   the   Kingdom of   Naples  to   Prince  Murat.  In   order  to   isolate  Austria  he sent  his   cousin  to   the   Tsar,   who   promised  neutrality;  he   asked Prussia  for   her   alliance,  but   was  refused.

Meanwhile  Napoleon,  disturbed  by   conspiracies  against  his person,  had  conducted  a   diplomatic  campaign  against  the French  refugees.  He  secured  a  special  law  for  the  repression of   insults  to   foreign   sovereigns,  in   Sardinia  by   Cavour,  in Belgium  by   the   new  Liberal  ministry.  But   in   England  the   bill presented  by   Palmerston,  coupled  with  the  anti-English  utterances in   France,  offended  national  sentiment,  and  the   House  of Commons  rejected  the  measure  (February,  1858).  The  ministry resigned,   and   the   new   Tory   ministry,  under  Derby,   showed  a more  friendly  disposition  toward  Austria.

The  Italian  War  (1859). - The  project  of   war  on   Austria  had been  kept   secret.  It   was  suddenly  announced  by   two  significant utterances:  the   one,  a   word  from  Napoleon  to   the   Austrian  ambassador, at   the   New  Year's  reception  in   1859;   the   other,   a   sentence in   Victor  Emmanuel's  speech  from  the   throne  on   January 10,   in   which  mention  is   made  of   the   "   cry   of   pain   which  resounded from  so  many  parts  of   Italy."  Armament  began   on   both  sides.

England,  on  request  from  Austria,  offered  her  mediation,  invited France  and   Sardinia  to   set   forth   their   grievances,  and   proposed the   evacuation  of   the   Italian  states  and   certain  reforms. Napoleon  appeared  to   hesitate.  The  war  was  popular  in   France, especially  with  the   liberal  and   Republican  parties,   the   enemies  of the   government.  It   was  regarded  with  disfavour  by   the   ministers, the   Empress,   the   salons,   the   Catholics,  and   the   business world.  Napoleon  got   Russia  to  propose  a  congress,  his   favourite idea   (March,   1859).   Austria  insisted  that   Sardinia  should not   be   invited  to   the   Congress  and   that   she   should  disarm.  England proposed  that   all   the   Italian  states  should  be   invited  and that   both  sides  should  disarm  at   once;   Napoleon  could  not  confess that   he   wanted  the   war;   he   had   to   accept   England's  proposal, and  telegraphed  Cavour  to   accept  also.  Cavour  was   in   despair, but   replied   that   he   would  obey.   It   was   Austria  that   brought  on the   war   by   sending  to   the   King   of   Sardinia  an  ultimatum  demanding his   promise   to   disarm  within  three  days.   Sardinia refused  to   comply,  and   the   Austrian  army  entered  Sardinian  ter-

ritory.      Austria  thus   appeared  to   have  made  the   war,  and   was left   in   isolation.

The   war  of   1859   consisted  of   two  operations  which  showed  the almost  equal   disorder  and  incoherency  of   direction  of   the   two armies.  Austria,  with  250,000  men,   had   only   110,000  at   her   disposal; 32   French  regiments  had  an  effective  force  of   less   than 1400  men;  mobilization  was  slow  and   incomplete  on   both  sides. 1.   The   Austrian  army  of   100,000  men,   instead  of   taking   the offensive  against  the   Sardinian  army  of   only   70,000,  gave   the French,  with  130,000  men,  time  to   join   the   Sardinians  at   Alessandria.    Then,   thinking   that   the   enemy  was  about  to   march southward  on   Parma,  the   Austrians  sent  a   detachment  to   prevent the   movement;  but   this   force   was  repulsed  at   Montebello. Meanwhile  the  Franco-Sardinian  army,  passing  to  the  north, took  the   offensive  and   entered  Lombardy  (battle   of   the   advanceguard   at   Palaestro,  May   30).      The   Austrians  fell   back  to   the   defence  of    Milan   and   took   a   position   in    the    plain    behind   a canal.    The  decisive  battle  of   Magenta  was  a   confused  struggle conducted  without  any  general  plan.     A   partial  attack  by   the French  on  the   bridge  of   the   canal  was   followed  by   a  series  of combats  between  re-enforcements  sent  by   both  sides.     The   Austrian general   had   already   telegraphed  the   news  of   his   victory,   and Napoleon  believed  himself  beaten,  when  MacMahon's  corps,  arriving at   the   last   minute,  compelled  the   Austrians  to   retreat.    The French  army,   in   disorder,  spent   the-night  where  they   stood,   without pursuing   the   enemy.      The   result  was   the   retreat  of   the   Austrians from   Lombardy,   followed  by   a   nationalist  revolution  there. 2.   The  Austrian  army   formed  again   in   Venetia,  where  the Emperor  came  to   place   himself  at   its   head.     Re-enforced  to   200,ooo  men,  after  much  hesitation  it   took  the   offensive  once  more   in order   to     reconquer    Lombardy.     The    Franco-Sardinian    army, somewhat  fewer  in   number,  marched  on  the   Mincio.     The   two armies  met  unexpectedly,  each  being   ignorant  of   the   other's movements.      The  unexpected  battle  of   Solferino,  on   June   24, consisted  of   three  separate  affairs:  one   in   the   north,   where   the Sardinian  army  was  checked;  another  in   the   south,  where  Niel held  firm  and   accused  Canrobert  of   not   having  supported  him (they   had   a   duel   later);   the   third   in   the   centre,  where   the   taking of   Solferino  by   the   French  compelled  the   Austrians  to   retreat.

Peace  with  Austria  (1859).- Napoleon,  agitated  by   the   sight   of the   battlefield,  disturbed  by   quarrels   between  his   generals,  became disgusted   with   the   war;   he   did   not   feel   strong  enough   to

overcome  the   Quadrilateral.  He   thought  to   distract  Austria  by revolution  in   Hungary;  he   had   put   himself  in   personal  communication with   Kossuth,  the   leader  of   the   Hungarian  refugees,  and had  had   him  come  to   Paris.  He   now  summoned  him  to   Italy. But  he   feared  a   rupture  with  England.

The  German  public,  alarmed  at   France's  success,  urged   Prussia to   take   Austria's  part.   Prince  William  had   been  waiting   to   make Austria  accept   his   conditions,  but   he   finally   mobilized  and   threatened the   Rhine   frontier.  Napoleon,  not  to   leave  the   powers  time to   impose  their  mediation  on   him,   negotiated  directly  with  the Emperor  of   Austria.  A   personal  interview  at   Villafranca  on July   ii  settled  the   preliminaries  of   peace.  The  final  treaty  was concluded  at   Zurich  in   November,  1859:   Lombardy  alone  was ceded  to   Sardinia;  Tuscany  and  Modena  were  to   be   restored  to their   princes,   and   an   Italian  federation  was  provided  for.  Except for   the   cession  of   Lombardy,  no  clause  of   the   agreement  was carried  out.

Annexations  and   the   Italian  Question  (1860-62). - Napoleon  let Italian  unity   get   accomplished  by   Italian  revolutionists,  assisted by   the   Sardinian  government  (see   pp.   351-54),  and   in   return  for his   neutrality  obtained  Savoy   and   Nice.

This  annexation  excited  general  distrust  of  Napoleon. Switzerland  claimed  the   part   of   Savoy   declared  neutral  by   the treaties  of   1815,   and   the   Swiss  Federal  Council  talked  of   military occupation.  The  King   of   Holland,  who  had  been  on  unfriendly terms  with  Belgium  since  1830,   paid   a  visit  to   the   King   of   the Belgians.  In   Germany  the   National  Union  protested  against  the annexation.  In   England  volunteer  militia  was   formed  to   defend the   coast  against   a   landing   of   French  troops.

Napoleon  protested  that  he   had   no  thought  but   of   peace;   he worked  in   harmony  with  England  in   China,  Syria,   and   Turkey, and  concluded  the   treaty  of   commerce  of   1860.  But   the   distrust continued.  England,  Prussia,  and  Austria  arranged  to   discuss together  every  international  communication  coming  from France.

The  creation  of   the   Kingdom  of   Italy   had   brought   up   the   Roman question   (p.   356).   Napoleon  tried  to   secure  a   congress  to settle  it   peaceably,  but   Europe   did   not  want  one.  He   still   hesitated, not   daring   either   to   withdraw  his   garrison   from   Rome  or to   recognise  the   Kingdom  of   Italy,   the   outcome  of   a   revolution condemned  by   the  Pope.  Then  he  made  a  compromise. Against  the   wishes  of   the   Empress,  he   recognised  the   Kingdom

of   Italy,   on   June   15,   1861,   but   with  the   qualification  that   he would   not   guarantee  it   and   did   not   wish   to   detract  from   the   value of   the   protests  of   the   curia.  He   wrote  personally  to   Victor Emmanuel  that   his   past   obliged   him   to   leave   his   troops   in   Rome; but   he   replaced   his   ambassador,  Gramont,  a   partisan  of   the   Pope, by   sending  Lavalette,  a   partisan  of   Italy.   He   instructed  the new  ambassador  to   propose  to   the   Pope   to   cede  his   provinces  to the   King   of   Italy   as   vicar.  The   Pope   replied   that   he   and   his cardinals  were   bound  by   their  oath  to   maintain  the   integrity  of the   States   of   the   Church.  After  Garibaldi's  attempt  (p.   354)   Napoleon took   as   ministers  supporters  of   the   Pope   and   of   the   peace with   Austria  (October,  1862).

The   Polish   Affairs  (1863).- Napoleon,  disgusted  with  affairs  in Italy,   returned  to   the   nationalist  question  in   Poland.  After  some years  of   nationalistic  agitation,  the   Poles  had   revolted  in   order to   induce  the   powers  to   intervene.  Insurgent  bands  came  from outside,  notably  from  Austria.  In   all   the   great   states,  public opinion  was   loud   in   favour  of   intervention.

The   Tsar,   hampered  by   finding   himself  isolated  and   censured, addressed  himself  personally  to   the   King   of   Prussia;  Bismarck used  this   opportunity  to   establish  an  understanding  between Prussia  and  Russia.  He   concluded  a  convention  in   February, 1863,   to   combine  the   military  action  of   the   two  states  against   the insurgents,  and   against   the   wish  of   all   Germany  declared  himself openly  hostile  to   the   Poles.  The  other  great  powers,  Austria, England,  and  France,  took  the   part   of   Poland.

Napoleon  first  addressed  the   Tsar  in   a   personal  letter,   urging him  to  restore  the  Kingdom  of   Poland.  On   his   refusal  Napoleon proposed   to   make   a   common  war  on   Russia;  England   refused. The   three   powers  agreed   only   to   propose  to   the   Tsar   certain reforms  in   Poland,  and   loaded  him   with   diplomatic  communications. They   did   not  wis'h,   however,  to   go   so   far   as   to   make war.  The  Russian  government  knew  it,   and  the  affair  was limited  to   the   exchange  of   notes  (p.   600).   Austria,  threatened with  war  by   Russia,  put   Galicia  under  martial  law   in   order  to hasten  the   end   of   the   insurrection.  England,  busy   with   the   question of   the   Elbe   duchies,  deserted  Poland.  Napoleon  attempted his   favourite  method:  he   invited  the   powers  to   a   congress  to settle  all   the   pending   questions - Poland,  the   duchies,  and   Rome, and  to   revise  the   treaties  of   1815.   England,  by   way  of   answer, showed  the   futility   of   such   a   congress. fused.

Napoleon  thus  remained  isolated  and  powerless - at   variance

with  the   Tsar,   and   entangled  in   the   Roman  question.  He   had lost   his   predominance;  Prussia,  with  the   Tsar's  alliance,  was  to succeed  to   it.

The  War  of   the   Duchies  (1864). - The   question  of   the   duchies of   Schleswig-Holstein,  opened  in   1848,   and   closed  by   the   powers' decision  in   1852,   was  reopened  by   the   extinction  of   the   Danish dynasty  in   1863   (p.   572).   The  German  states  supported  the Duke  of   Augustenburg;  the   European  powers  defended  the   integrity of   the   Danish  monarchy;  Austria  and  Prussia  took  an intermediate  position,  accepting  the  Gliicksburg  succession guaranteed  by   Europe,  but   rejecting  the   new   Danish  constitution (January,  1864).  There  were  then  three  parties:  I.   Denmark, supported  by   the   great  non-German  powers;  2.  the  Duke  of Augustenburg,  supported  by   the   States  of   Germany;  3.   Prussia and  Austria.

The  Danish  government  was  counting  on   European  intervention. England   declared  to   Prussia  that   she   did   not  guarantee neutrality,  and  proposed  a  conference  of   the  powers  that  had signed   the   treaty   of   1852   (December,  1863).   But   Napoleon,  displeased with   England   for   'having   abandoned  him   in   the   Polish affair,   thought  to   apply   the   "   principle  of   nationalities  "   by   uniting to   Germany  the  German  parts  of   the   duchies.  He   refused armed  assistance  to   Denmark.  Queen  Victoria  did  not  want war,  and  the   English  ministry  dared  not  send  an  ultimatum. Prussia  and  Austria  began   the   war  of   the   duchies  in   January, 1864.  It   is   divided  into   three  acts.

1.   The   Danish  army  of   35,000  men,   intrenched  behind  the lines  of   the   Danewerk,  had  received  orders  that  the   operations should  be   dragged  out   long   enough   to   give   Europe   time   to   intervene, but   not   to   expose   itself   to   defeat,   for   it   was  the   only   Danish army.      The   Austro-Prussian  army,  of   70,000  men,  was   instructed to   destroy  the   Danish  army  without  giving  it   time  to reach  the   lines   of   retreat  in   case  of   an  attempt  to   retire  to   Jutland. It   attacked  the   Danewerk,  but   the   Danish  army,  without  waiting to   be   forced,  withdrew  by   night   and   escaped.     The  allies  took possession  of   the   whole  of   Schleswigf  in   January  and   February, 1864.

2.   The   Danish  army,  stationed  behind  the   Diippel  intrenchments,  barred  the   entrance  to   Jutland.     The  operations  against Diippel,  in   March  and   April,   consisted  of   a   five-weeks'  blockade, a   bombardment,  and   a   general  assault  of   six   columns  against   the redoubts.     The   Danes  evacuated  Jutland,  and   the   allies  occupied

it.   England  had   finally   succeeded  in   organizing  the   London Conference;  but   when   it   opened,  on   April   12,   the   taking   of   Duppel   had   already   practically  settled  the   question;  victorious  Prussia and   Austria   no   longer   wished  to   recognise  the   treaties  of   1852 and   demanded  the   complete  separation  of   the   duchies  from  Denmark. England   offered  France  to  agree  on  an  ultimatum. France  recalled  " the   deplorable  issue   "   of   their  course  in   the Polish  question  and   asked  if   England  was  willing   to   conclude  an offensive  alliance.  England  made  no  reply,   and  the   conference broke  up   without  accomplishing  anything.

3.   When   .the   armistice  had   expired,  in   June,   the   allies   invaded the   islands.  The   Danish  government  asked  for  peace.  The peace  of   Vienna,  concluded  in   October  30,   ceded  the   duchies to   Prussia  and   Austria.

Rupture  between  Prussia  and   Austria  (1864-66).- Austria  and Prussia  had   been   in   conflict  since  1860,   when  reform  of   the   Confederation had   been  attempted  (p.   465).   But   the   Austrian  government, having   fallen   out   with   the   German  states  on   the   question of   the   duchies,  had   made  overtures  to   Prussia. ernment,

The   conflict  began   again   with   the   question  of   determining  the disposition  of   the   duchies  they   had  conquered  together.  A special   council  of   the   Prussian  ministers,  July   21,   1865,   declared Austria's  concessions  insufficient  and  advised  immediate  war. But  King   William  was  unwilling  to   attack,  and   Austria,  having no  money,  wished  to   avoid  a   war.  The  Gastein  Convention  in August  settled  the   question  provisionally  by   dividing  the   duchies. France  protested  against  this   act  as  a   violation  of   the   principle of   nationalities  and   the   popular   will,   and   as  a   revival  of   a   procedure that   had   become  obsolete  in   Europe.  Thus  the   French theory   of   popular   right   as  expressed  by   plebiscite,  was  avowed,  in opposition  to  the  traditional  theory  of   the   right   of   conquest adopted  by   Prussia.  (On   the   famous  formula,  La   force  prime   le droit,   Force  masters  law,   by   which  the   French  public   characterize

Bismarck's  policy,   see  p.   463.) Napoleon  had  made  advances  to   Italy,   bringing  up   the   Roman question   by   the   September  convention,  1864.   The   peace party,  which  had   held   the   ministry  since  1862,   hoped   to   reconcile Italy   with  Austria  by   inducing  the   latter  to   give   up   Venetia. But   the   Italian  government  wished  to   keep   its   army  ready,   and Austria  still   refused  to   recognise  the   Kingdom  of   Italy.

Bismarck  tried  to   conclude  an  alliance  with   Italy   against   Austria. Italy   could   do   nothing   that   France  did   not   approve;   Na-

poleon's  authorization  must  therefore  be   obtained.  Bismarck came  to   ask   it   of   him.  The   Biarritz  interview  of   October,  1865,* was  the   decisive  act  of   this   negotiation.  Napoleon  resumed  his personal  policy:  to   bring   about  the   national  unity   of   Italy,   to fortify   Prussia  against   Austria,  and   to   profit   by   the   conflict  to gain   territory  and   destroy  the   treaties  of   i8i5.f  Bismarck's game  was  to   encourage  these  hopes   without  making  any   formal engagement.  He   prevailed  on   Napoleon  to   promise  the   neutrality of   France.

With  Italy   the   negotiation  was  long.   The  Italian  government, having   twice   already   received  a   proposition  of   alliance,  in 1862  and  1865,   no   longer   believed  in   Bismarck's  sincerity,  suspecting him   of   using   Italy   to   alarm  Austria.  When  the   conflict with  Austria  became  bitter  Prussia  sounded  t'he   Italian  government, and   an   Italian   general   was  sent  to   Berlin.  But   the   negotiations dragged   along   without  result.  Italy   hoped  to  gain Venetia  without  war,   in   exchange  for   Roumania,  which  had  become vacant   (p.   644).  In   Prussia  both  King   William  and  most of   the   ministers  desired  peace.  Bismarck,  however,  succeeded  in obtaining  an  offensive  alliance  for   three  months  on   April   8. Italy   promised  armed  support  to   Prussia's  plans   for   the   reform of   the   Confederation,  and   Prussia  promised  to   secure  the   cession of   Venetia.  Italy   had  wished  not  merely  Venetia  but  "   the Italian  territories  subject  to   Austria," - which  would  have  included the   Tyrol,   a   part   of   the   German  Confederation;  this   Bismarck had   declined  to   agree   to.   Napoleon  promised  neutrality. tions

Austria's  policy   was  to   delay   a   rupture   in   Germany  in   order  to force  Prussia,  by   taking   the   aggressive  role,   to   alienate  the   German States   (which   plan   succeeded)  and   in   Europe   to   isolate  Prussia by   satisfying  Italy.  She  proposed  to   Prussia,  on   April   25, that   both   sides  should  disarm,  but   not   in   Italy.   She   left   France the   hope   that   she   would  cede   Venetia  if   Italy   remained  neutral. As   compensation  for   Venetia  she   spoke   of   taking   back  Silesia from  Prussia.

Napoleon,  divided  between  Prince  Jerome  and  the  Catholic party,   hesitated.  He   fell   back  on   'his   favorite  idea   of   a   congress,

*   Bismarck  had  gone  to   Biarritz  the  preceding  year,   but   Napoleon  and his   minister  of   foreign  affairs  had   not  taken  him  seriously.
- f In   a   speech   at   Auxerre,  May   6,   1866,   he   said:  "   I   detest  these  treaties of   1815,   which  we  are  expected  to-day  to   make  the  basis  of   our  foreign policy."  Thiers  had  just   made  in   the  Chamber  a  speech  against  Prussia and  German  unity   which  was  applauded  even  by   the  imperialist  majority.

to   revise  the   map  of   Europe.  England  and  Russia  agreed; Prussia  and   Italy,   from   regard   for   Napoleon,  had   agreed   beforehand. Austria   defeated  the   scheme  by   demanding  that   no   increase of   territory  should  be   discussed  and   that   the   Pope   should be   invited.

The  rupture  came  in   Germany,  in   the   Diet  (p.   470).   Prussia, reassured  on   the   French  side,   removed  her   garrisons  from  the western  frontier  and   concentrated  all   her   powers  against   Austria and   her   allies.

The   War  of   1866. - War  broke  out  at   once  in   Bohemia,  Venetia,   and   Germany,  between  Prussia  allied  with  Italy   and   Austria allied   with   most  of   the   German  States.  Like  all   the   rest  of Europe,  Napoleon  believed  that  as   the   forces  were  almost  equal the   war  would  be   a   long   one;   he   was  planning,  When  the   belligerents were  exhausted,  to   intervene  as  an  all-powerful  arbiter,  without even  needing   to   fight.   This   scheme  was   baffled  by   an  unexpected development,  the   unprecedented  swiftness  of   the   Prussian army's  successes.

The  war  was  decided  in   a   single   day.   Two   of   the   three   Prussian armies  (the   Elbe   and   first   Silesia)   had   met   and   were  awaiting the   third,   which  had   to   traverse  more  difficult  passages. They   attacked  the   Austrian  army,   intrenched  on   the   steep   heights of   a   forest  country,  defended  by   artillery  arranged  tier   over  tier. The  battle  of   Sadowa  or   Koniggraetz,  on   July   3,   was   long   and bloody.  It   was  decided  by   the   arrival  of   the   third   Prussian army,  which  penetrated  to   the   midst  of   the   Austrian  positions without  having  been  perceived.  The   Austrian  general,  Benedek, said   it   was   concealed  by   mist.  The   Austrians,  having   lost   25,000 men  and  20,000  prisoners,  retreated  in   disorder.  They   could   do

For  her   war  against   Austria,  Prussia  mobilized  300,000  men and   formed  three  separate  armies, - the   army  of   the   Elbe,   the   first army  of   Silesia,  and   the   second  army  of   Silesia, - which  entered Bohemia  from  three  sides,  and  driving  before  them  the   Saxons and   Austrians  (June   26-30)   manoeuvred  to   come  together  again. The  Austrian  army,  comprising  220,000  men,  was  more  slowly mobilized,  did  not   defend  the   defiles,  and   was  reduced  to   the defensive.  It   concentrated  itself  in   a   fortified  position  in   Koniggraetz,  already  demoralized  by   the   quick   movements  of   the   Prussians and   the   rapid   fire   of   their   needle-guns.

nothing  more  to   hinder  the   enemy's  march  on   Vienna. In   Italy,   the   Austrian  army   had   held   itself   on   the   defensive, guarding  Venetia.  The  Italian  army,  which  was   larger,   attacked

it   and   was   driven  back.  This  was  the   battle  of   Custozza,  June 24,   which  forced  the   Italians  to   fall   back   into   Lombardy.  After the   news  of   Sadowa,  the   Italians  made  it   a   point   of   honour  to conquer  Venetia  themselves;  but   the   Italian  army  gained   no   decisive success,  and   their   fleet   was   destroyed  at   Lissa   by   the   Austrian fleet.

Peace  of   Prague  (1866). - The   Austrian  government,  in   order to   concentrate  its   forces  against   Prussia,  ceded  Venetia  to   Napoleon, begging   him   to   negotiate   peace  with   Italy   (July   5).   Napoleon seemed  to   be   the   arbiter  of   Europe.  The   minister  of foreign  affairs,   who   favoured  Austria,  urged   him   to   mobilize  and stop   Prussia  by   threatening  to   take   possession  of   the   left   bank of   the   Rhine,  Which  was  unprotected.  But   the   minister  of   war confessed  that   the   army  was   disorganized  by   the   Mexican  expedition and   that   he   could   not   get   together   more  than   40,000  men. Napoleon,  who  was  in   ill   health,  hesitated  between  two  policies: whether  to   impose  peace  on   Prussia  or  negotiate  with  her   to secure  advantage  for   himself.*  He   thus  let   slip   the   moment for   intimidating  Prussia  by   a   demonstration  on  the  Rhine. The  policy   of   the   Prussian  government  was  to   put   Napoleon  off with  vague  promises,  keeping  him  passive  while  the   Prussian army  was  marching  on   Vienna.

Napoleon  first  tried  to   check  Italy   by   threatening  to   join   Austria against   her   (July   9);   Italy   replied   that   she   could  agree   to nothing  without  Prussia  and  refused  an  armistice.  Napoleon then  sent  to   the   Prussian  camp  to   ask   the   King   to   authorize  a truce  for   Italy.   He   then  proposed  the   bases  of   a   peace   (July   14): integrity  of   Austria,  dissolution  of   the   Confederation,  confederation of   northern  Germany,  and  cession  by   Austria  of   'her   right   in the   duchies.  On   these  conditions  all   were  agreed.  The  difficulty was   in   arranging  additions  of   territory;  Prussia  wished  to annex  several  German  states,  but   Austria  dared  not  abandon  her allies  to   that   fate.  Napoleon  wanted  to   secure  some  territory  to

*   On   July   4,   at   eleven  o'clock  at   night,   he   signed   a   decree  convoking  the Chambers  to  vote  the  mobilization;  on  the  5th,   at   5   o'clock  in   the   morning, he   countermanded  the   order.  He   held  a   council  on   the   sth;   on   the advice  of   Drouyn  and  the  Empress,  he   decided  to   continue  the   preparations for   war;   then,   on   Lavalette's  representation  of   the   bad   condition  of the   French  army  and  the  superiority  of   the   needle  gun,   he   suspended  his decision;  Drouyn  insisted,  saying  that  a  military  demonstration  on  the Rhine  would  suffice;  Jerome  objected  on  the  ground  that  after  having encouraged  Prussia,  a   hostile  attitude  would  make  a   bad  impression. Napoleon  remained  undecided.

compensate  France  for   the   increase  of   Prussia.  But   Bismarck knew  that   Prussia's  army  made  her   mistress  of   the   situation,  and he   stood  out   for   his   own  terms.

By   the   preliminary  peace  of   Nikolsburg,  July   26,   Austria  withdrew from   German  affairs,   ceding   her   right   in   the   duchies  and leaving  Prussia  free   to   establish  a  new  confederation  and  to annex  the   North  German  states  except  Saxony.  Bismarck made  concessions  of   form:  i.   The  German  states  south  of   the Main,  left   out   of   the   new  confederation,  should  have  the   right   to form  a   union  of   their   own.  2.   The   northern  districts  of   Schleswig   should  be   restored  to   Denmark  if   their   population  so   wished. The  final   peace  of   Prague   of   August   23   preserved  these  two clauses,  but   they   remained  illusory.

Napoleon  asked  Prussia  for   a   territorial  enlargement,  and   the Prussian  envoy   let   him   hope   for   one   (July   19).   When  the   Tsar proposed  a  congress  to   settle  the   changes  in   Germany,  it   was Napoleon  himself  that  refused,  hoping   to   gain   more  from  Prussia. He   offered   a   secret  understanding  for   mutual  enlargement : France  to   have   the   possessions  of   Bavaria  and   Hesse  on   the   left bank  of   the   Rhine.  Bismarck  insisted  upon  a  written  draft  of the   scheme  (to   use  against   Napoleon),  then  refused  it,   and   later published  it   in   a  conversation  with  a  correspondent  of   the Siecle.  In   face  of   the   commotion  in   Germany,  Napoleon  withdrew his   project,   denied  the   rumours  of   negotiation  (August   12), and   turned  to   Belgium.  He   proposed  (August  20)   that   Prussia should  aid   France  to   acquire  Belgium  and   Luxemburg.  Bismarck had   the   plan   written  out  at   Napoleon's  dictation;  he published  it   in   1870,   to   embroil  England  and   Belgium  with France.*

Napoleon  therefore  obtained  no  positive  result,  and   Prussia,  by a   single   war,   acquired   first   place   in   Germany.  Europe   had   done nothing  to   prevent  it.   Prussia's  new  methods  of   fighting  had made  the   European  concert  powerless.

The  South  German  states  were  isolated  and   quickly  crushed by   Prussia.  They   at   once  asked  for   France's  mediation  ; but   Bismarck showed  them  Napoleon's  plans   for   annexation  at   their expense,  and   in   August   induced  them  to   conclude  with   Prussia secret  treaties  of   offensive  and   defensive  alliance.

The   Luxemburg  Affair  (1867).- The   Grand  Duchy  of   Luxemburg, after   the   dissolution  of   the   Germanic  Confederation,  re-

·The  Germans  in   1870   seized  the   Rouher  papers  and   published  the   report of   the   French  envoy   Benedetti  on   this   negotiation.

mained  occupied  by   the   Prussian  garrison  of   the   federal  fortress (see   p.   243).   Its   sovereign,  the   King   of   Holland,  was  anxious to   sell   it;   Napoleon  grasped   at   this   opportunity  to   secure  additional territory.   He   believed  that   the   Prussian  government  was only   awaiting  a   pretext  to   withdraw  its   garrison  in   such  a   way   as not  to   offend  German  public   opinion;  Bismarck  left   him  under this  delusion.  The  King   of   Holland  agreed  to  sell,   provided Prussia  would  consent;  Bismarck  did   not  refuse  distinctly,  but on   March  19,   1867,   he   published  the   treaties  concluded  with  the South  German  states  in   1866,   so  as   to   show  Prussia's  power. He  told  the   King   of   Holland  that  he   would  leave  to   him  the responsibility  for   his   acts.  The  King,   believing  that  Bismarck wished  only   to   have  his   hand  forced,  notified  Napoleon  that   the sale   would  be   made  (March  30).

The  treaty  of   cession  had  been  drawn  up   and  announced  to Europe,  when  an   interpellation  was  made  in   the   Reichstag  on the   rumour  of   a   sale   of   German  territory  by   a   prince   of   German blood.  Bismarck  replied  that  nothing  had  yet   been  arranged and   sent  word  to   the   King   of   Holland  that   in   the   present  agitated condition  of   opinion  in   Germany  the  cession  of   Luxemburg would  result  in   war.  The  King   withdrew  'his   consent,  in   spite of   French  insistence.  Napoleon  seemed  to  shrink  from  the crisis.  This  was  a   diplomatic  victory  for   Prussia.

The  question  of   the   federal  fortress  was  settled  by   a   European conference,  which  revised  the   treaty  of   1839.

Latent  Conflict  between  France  and   Prussia  (1867-70). - By   the superiority  of   her   army   Prussia  had   won   first   place   in   Europe, and  she  was  preparing  a  complete  union  of   Germany.  The other  great  powers  were  not  reconciled  to   these  two  revolutions, which  threatened  the   old   balance  of   power   in   Europe.  But   Austria was   discouraged,  England  powerless,  and   the   Tsar  opposed to   war.  France  felt   strong  enough   single-handed  to   check  Prussia and   restore  her   own  predominance.  Public  opinion   in   France had  suddenly  become  hostile  to   German  unity;   people   talked  of "   avenging  Sadowa."  In   Prussia  national  pride,   exalted  by   success, showed  itself   in   threats  against   the   "   hereditary  enemy." But   on   both   sides   these   warlike  sentiments  were  counterbalanced by   the   fear   of   a   war  which  all   felt   would  be   a   terrible  one.

A   period   of   hesitation  followed.  The  visit  of   the   Tsar  and the   King   of   Prussia  to   the   World's  Exposition  at   Paris  in   1867 seemed  to   promise  peace.  But   the   interview  between  Napoleon and   the   Emperor  of   Austria  in   August,   1867,   disturbed  the   public

mind,   especially  when  Napoleon,  on   his   return  to   France,  referred in   an   official   speech   to   "   black  clouds  on   the   horizon." The   party   formerly   in   favour  of   peace   (with   Austria)   now   became a   war   party   and   sought   alliances  against   Prussia.  In   Austria the   Emperor  had   given   the   direction  of   foreign   policy   to   a   former minister  of   the   King   of   Saxony   and   an  enemy  to   Prussia,  Count Beust,   who   still   hoped   to   restore  Austria  to   her   old   position   in Germany.

Then   came  a   series   of   agitations  in   the   East,   fomented,  it   was said,   by French  agents,  to   occupy  Russia  and  keep   her   from interfering  in   the   West.  The   revolt  in   Crete,   supported  by   Greece (1866-68),  a   movement  in   Bulgaria  excited  by   bands  from  Roumania  (1868),  a   Roumanian  agitation  and  armament  (1868),  a conspiracy  in   Servia,  and  a  gathering  of   Polish  refugees  in Galicia,  following  each  other  in   close  succession.  The  Tsar, however,  remained  calm,   and   quiet   was  soon  restored.

The  occasion  was  the   purchase  of   the   Belgian  railroads  by   the French  Eastern  Company,  in   February,  1869;   the   Belgian  government forbade   the   sale.   The   French  government  attributed this   check  to   Bismarck.  Napoleon  was  annoyed,  and   proposed to   Austria  and   Italy   a   triple   alliance  to   put   a   stop   to   Prussia's encroachments  and  restore  Austria  to   her   old   place   in   Germany. The  negotiation  was  conducted  by   t'he   ambassadors  (March). Austria  accepted  the   defensive  alliance,  but   reserved  the   right of   neutrality  if   France  were  the   one  to   begin   war   (April).   The Italians  asked  that   the   French  troops  might   be   withdrawn  from Rome,  and  were  content  with  Napoleon's  promise  to   withdraw

The  French  government  was  counting  on   Denmark  against Prussia.  Bismarck,  before  taking,  in   Schleswig,  the  plebiscite promised  in   1866,   asked  special   guarantees  for   protection  of   the Germans  in   Schleswig  (1867);  then,   as  no  agreement  could  be made  regarding  the   territory  to   be   ceded,   he   broke  off   the   negotiations in   March,  1868.  The  Danish  government  sent  its   minister of   war  to   Paris  in   April.   The   Austrian  and   Italian  governments also   wished   to   join   France.  But   in   Austria  Beust  was fettered  by   the   Hungarians,  who  favoured  peace,  and  the   Germans, who   hated   France;   in   Italy   the   Consorteria  ministry,   favouring the   French  alliance,  was   intimidated  by   the   Radicals,  who were  irritated  by   the   Mentana  affair.  These  wished  to   join Prussia  and  force  France  to   abandon  Rome.  The   whole  negotiation was   secret,   and   its   nature   has   been   interpreted  in   various ways,   but   no  practical  result  was  accomplished.

them  as  soon  as  possible;  but   when,   in   August,  it   became  necessary to   ratify   the   project,   the   Italian  ministry   demanded  the immediate  withdrawal  from  Rome,  and  a   declaration  that  France would  not  again   intervene  in   Italian  affairs.  The  negotiation hung   in   the   balance;  each  of   the   three  sovereigns  simply   promised to   conclude  no  other  alliance  without  notifying  the   other two.  Napoleon  then  accepted  a  parliamentary  ministry  whose head,   Ollivier,  had   declared  himself  in   favour  of   peace  and   reconciliation with   Germany.  This   ministry,  in   January,  1870,   revived the   plan   for   securing   the   peace  of   Europe   by   getting   both France  and  Prussia  to   disarm;  England  agreed  to  transmit  it. France  offered  to   diminish  her  yearly   military  contingent  by 10,000  men.  Bismarck  made  the   objection  that  Prussia's  organization made   disarmament  impossible  (February,  1870).

The  proposition  made  to  the   Reichstag  on   February  24,   to admit  the   Grand  Duchy   of   Baden  into   the   northern  confederation, renewed  the   agitation  against  Prussia  and  German  unity;   Bismarck was   reproached  with   having   failed  to   reply   that   this   would be   contrary  to   the   treaty   of   Prague,   whereby  the   independence of   the   states  south  of   the   Main  was  guaranteed.  Bismarck  replied, through   his   newspapers,  that   the   treaty   did   not   forbid  the Southern  States  to   join   the   northern  confederation.  The  Austrian Archduke  Albert  passed   some  weeks  in   Paris,   studying the   French  military  situation.  He   proposed  to   Napoleon  a   plan of   campaign;  the   French  army,   he   said,   was  too  weak  to   fight Prussia  alone;   it   should  invade  South  Germany,  which  the   Austrian and   Italian  armies  would  enter  through  Bavaria.  Napoleon kept   this   plan   without  speaking   of   it   (March).

The  Vatican  Council,  and  later  the   plebiscite  on   the   constitutional changes,   engaged   the   attention  of   the   French  government. The   Catholic  powers   had   refrained  from  interfering  in the   convocation  of   the   Council  ; but   when,   in   February,  the   plan for   the   promulgation  of   infallibility  came  up,   Daru,   the   French minister  of   foreign  affairs,  together  with  Napoleon,  drew  up a   note  reserving  the   rights   of   the   state  and   announcing  the   sending of   a   French  representative  to  the  Council.  Ollivier  prevented this   course,   the   Holy   See   having   claimed  the   right   of   the Church  to  arrange  its   affairs  freely   (March).  Daru  drew  up   a note  which  Austria  approved;  the   Roman  curia  refused  to   bring it   before  the   Council  (April).  France  could  influence  the   Pope by   threatening  to   withdraw  her   troops   from  Rome ; Ollivier  persuaded Napoleon   to   renounce  this   means.  Daru  completed  his ment.

rupture  with  Ollivier  on  the  question  of   the  Plebiscite  (see p.   184).

In   the   reconstitution  of   the   ministry,  Daru,  who  favoured peace,  was  replaced  by   Gramont,  an  enemy  to   Prussia.  Napoleon communicated  the   Archduke's  plan   of   campaign  to   certain  French officers  and   sent   General  Lebrun  to   Vienna,  with  no  official  mission, to   discuss  with  the   Archduke  modifications  of   his   plan: Austria  and   Italy   needed  six   weeks  to   mobilize;  France,  which would  be   ready   much  sooner,  would  enter  upon   the   campaign  in South  Germany;  Austria  and   Italy   would  arm,   but   preserve  their neutrality.  Lebrun  obtained  a  private  audience  with  the   Emperor of   Austria,  who  told   him   he   could  not   declare  war  at   the same  time   with   France  (June).*  Napoleon  seemed  to   have  given up   the   idea   of   war,   for   the   minister  of   war  asked  the   Chamber for   10,000   less   men,  and   Ollivier  declared  that   peace   had   never been  more  assured,  the   governments  having   all   learned  the   necessity of   respecting  the   treaties  on  which  Europe's  peace  rested, that   of   Paris   for   the   East,   that   of   Prague   for   Germany   (June   30).

Declaration  of   War  (1870). - Peace  seemed  assured,  Napoleon was  ill,   and   the   Prussian  government  taking   a   vacation,  when  a diplomatic  incident  suddenly  produced  a  complication  which  in a   few   days   led   to   a   war   between  the   two   first   military   powers   in Europe.

Since  1869   the   Spanish   provisional  government  had   been  seeking a   king   (see   p.   311).   It   offered  the   throne  to   a   Catholic

*   Two  French  diplomats,  the   Duke  of   Gramont  and   Chaudordy,  have given   an   interpretation  of   these  negotiations  that  has   been  adopted  in France  by   a   proportion  of   the   people   and   propagated  by   German  his torians  hostile  to   Beust,  who  are   disposed  to   believe  in   a   secret  plot   prepared against   Prussia.- Gramont  said   that  France  before  declaring  was had  secured  the   aid   of   Austria  and  Italy;   she   had,   if   not   a   formal  treaty, at   least   the   promise   that   Austria  would  support   her;   neutrality  was  once a   means  to   gain   time   for   mobilization.- Chaudordy  tells   of   Gramont's  discussions (between   July   15   and   August   4,   1870)   with   Austrian  and   Italian ambassadors  and  military  attaches- Metternich  and   Vitzthum,  Nigra   and Vimercati;  he   thinks  that  neutrality  was  agreed  on   in   order  to   give Austria  and  Italy   time  to   arm,  and   that  these  states  were  to   enter   upon the   campaign  in   September,  on  condition  that  a   French  army  should   have entered  South  Germany.- This  interpretation  rests  on   two  ambiguous phrases  in   a   letter  from  Beust  to   the   Austrian  ambassador,  July   20,   1870. -As  for   Italy,   Prince  Jerome   declared  that  the   alliance  was  wrecked  by discord  on   the   Roman  question.  There  is,   therefore,  no   proof   that   the Triple   Alliance  was  ever  more  than  a   project   (see   v.   Sybel,   "   Begrucdung des   Deutschen  Reiches,"  vol.   vii.).

prince,  Leopold  of   Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen,  allied  to   the   imperial family   of   France.*  The   offer   was  made  four   times  to   the Prince's  father;  three  times  it   was  refused,  but   the   fourth  time it   was  accepted,  July,   1870.   The  French  government,  which had   known  of   the   negotiations  even  in   1869,   received  official  information from   Spain;   it   did   not  reply   directly,   fearing   to   offend Spanish  pride   by   appearing  to   interfere  in   the   free   choice  of   a king.  It   addressed  the  Prussian  government,  declaring  that France  had  but   a   poor  opinion  of   the   selection.  The   coming  ot a   Hohenzollern  to   Spain   was  regarded  as  a  provocation  and  a menace  from  Prussia;  France,  it   was  said,   could  not  suffer  the Empire  of   Charles  V.   to   be   restored.  In   Berlin  it   was  said,   on the   contrary,  that   the   choice  of   a   Spanish   sovereign  did   not  concern the   Prussian  government;  that   it   was  a   private   affair  of   the Hohenzollern  family,  and  that  William  had  no  authority  over the   Sigmaringen  branch.f

In   the   French  Chamber  a  question  was  raised  regarding  the candidacy  of   a   Hohenzollern  for  the  Spanish  throne.  The French  ministry,  favouring  peace   by   a   large   majority,  prepared a   peaceful  answer.  But  Gramont,  who  considered  the  affair  a plot   of   Bismarck's,  added  a 'sentence  on   the   craftiness  of   Prussia; it   was  received  with  patriotic  acclamations  in   the   Chamber,  and the   papers   began   to   talk   of   war   (June   6).

*The  idea  was  originated  by   Salazar,  a   Unionist  Spanish  deputy,  in February,  1869:  i.   Proposition  made  to   the  Prince's  father,  who  refused in   the   spring   of   1869;   the   French  agent   in   Prussia,. Benedetti,  on   hearing of   it,   questioned  Bismarck,  who  seemed  to   consider  the  refusal  as  certain. - 2.   Proposition  carried  secretly  to   the   prince's  father,  who,   before  beginning negotiations,  asked  the   assurance  that  William  and  Napoleon  approved, and   informed  Napoleon  of   it,   September,  1869.- 3.   Proposition carried  secretly  with  two  personal  letters  from  Prim  to   William  and  Bismarck in   February,  1870;   William  advised  a   refusal;  Bismarck,  who  advocated acceptance,  was  taken  sick   and   left   for   the   country. - 4,   Proposition from  the   Spanish  government  on   June   14;   the   Prince  accepted.

f Two  opposite  interpretations  have  been  given   to   these  facts.  The  Germans, who   believed  there  was  a   plan   on   foot   between  the   three  Catholic powers  to  make  war  on   Prussia,  regarded  the  sudden  opposition  of   the French  government  to   the  Hohenzollern  candidacy  as  a  pretext  for   use  as a   casus  belli. - The   French,  on   the   contrary,  believed  it   a   ruse  of   Bismarck's to   pique   France's  pride   and   lead  her   into   a   war.  Von  Sybel's  demonstration shows  that   neither  of   these  two   interpretations  has  been  proved. But  a  suggestion  from  the  King   of   Roumania,  Charles  of   Hohenzollern, in   1894,   indicates  that  the  candidacy  was  an   instrument  of   Prussian policy.

The   European  powers  disapproved  the   Prince's  candidacy  and desired  to   maintain  peace;  the   English   government  tried  to   induce Spain   to   withdraw  the   offer.  Napoleon  personally  charged the   King   of   Belgium  to   induce  the   Prince  to   reconsider  his   acceptance. On   July   12   the   Prince  withdrew  it   by   an  official declaration.  The  matter  was  thought  to   be   settled.  Ollivier announced  that  peace  was  assured,  and  the   public   funds  rose 2   francs.

But   Gramont  had   already  put   the   question  on  a   new  ground and  created  a   new  complication.  Convinced  that  the   Hohenzollern  prince   was  only   the   secret  tool   of   the   King   of   Prussia, he   asked  William  to   forbid  the   Prince  to   accept  this   candidacy, which  was  so  offensive  to   France.  "   No   one,"   he   said,   "   will believe  that   a   Prussian  prince   could  accept  the   Spanish  crown without  permission  from  the   King,   the   head  of   his   family.  .   . If   the   King   has   not  given   his   permission,  let   him  forbid  it " (July   7).   The   King   was  taking   the   waters  at   Ems;   the   French government  sent  Benedetti  there  to  present  the   new  demand. The  King   replied  that  the   matter  was  no  affair  of   his   government and   that   he   had   no  power   to   forbid  the   Prince.  Gramont, who  felt   sure  that  the   King   of   Prussia  made  evasive  answers in   order  to   gain   time   for   preparation,  wished  to   oblige   him   to unmask;  he   gave  orders  to   demand  a   categorical  reply.   He   was trying   to   show  Europe   that   Prussia  was  responsible  for   this   affair and  that  France  had  forced  her   to   draw  back.  The   King,   on the   contrary,  preserved  the   attitude  of   a   disinterested  spectator;

on   July   1 1   he   said   that   he   was  waiting   for   the   Prince's  reply. After  the   renunciation  on   July   12,   Gramont,  having   no   further ground  for   demanding  a  prohibition,  wished  to   obtain  from  the King  a   declaration  to   satisfy   French  national  honour;  in   the Chamber  the  belligerent  Right   announced  an   interpellation  on the   securities  obtained  for   the   future.  The   government,  therefore, sent   Benedetti  to   the   King   to   say   that,   as   the   resignation was  not  a   sufficient  reply   to   the   demands  and   still   less   a   guarantee for   the   future,   the   King   should  promise   that   he   would not  allow  the   Prince  to  resume  the   candidacy.  However,  the council  of   French  ministers  refused  fhe   mobilization  proposed by   the   minister  of   war.

The  decisive  action  was  taken  at   Ems  on   July   13.   The   King was  in   the   park.   Benedetti  came  in   the   morning  to   communicate to   him  the  request  for   a  guarantee.  The   King   replied: "   You   are   asking,   a   promise  without  limit   of   time   and   for   all

conditions.  I   cannot  give   it."  Benedetti  insisted;  the   King   replied that   he   refused  this   unparalleled  demand  once  for   all.   Then came  a   despatch  from  the   Prussian  ambassador  saying   that   Napoleon was  going   to   ask   the   King   for   a   .personal  letter  assuring him  that   he   had   had   no   intention  to   injure   France's  interests. William  was  vexed,  and   decided  not  to   receive  Benedetti  again; he   sent  word  to   him   by   his   aide-de-camp  that   the   letter  from   the Prince  of   Sigmaringen  had  arrived  confirming  his   withdrawal, and   that   he   regarded  the   matter  as  at   an  end.  Benedetti  insisted upon  an  audience;  the   aide-de-camp  replied  that  the   King   adhered to   the   declaration  of   the   morning.

Bismarck,  once  more  in   Berlin,  irritated  by   Gramont's  declaration and   by   certain  articles  in   the   French  newspapers,  announced to   the   English   ambassador  his   intention  of   demanding  explanations and   guarantees  from  France.  He   received  by   telegraph an  account  of   the   Ems   interview,  with   authorization  to   communicate it   to   the   press.   He   also   published  it   immediately  in   his semi-official  organ,  the   North  German  Gazette,  in   an  abbreviated and   precise   form  which  brought  out   distinctly  the   King's   refusal to   reply   to   Benedetti's  demands.*

The  article  was  sent  all   over   Europe,   and   made  war   inevitable. It   was  received  in   Germany  as  a  patriotic  demonstration,  in France  as  an   insult.  The   council  of   ministers,  held   on   the   morning of   July   14,   had   still   sought   to   maintain  peace;   it   thought   of Napoleon's  favourite  plan,   a   congress  of   the   powers  to   establish the   principle  of   excluding  all   members  of   reigning  families  from the   Spanish  throne.  Another  council,  held  at   St.   Cloud,   at   six o'clock  that   evening,  was  still   deliberating,  when  Gramont  received and   read   a   despatch  which  caused  an   immediate  decision in   favour  of   mobilization  ; this   was  the   news  of   the   insult  given   to France.f  War  was  announced  the  next  day   to   the   Chamber  in

*   Bismarck  having  boasted  later  of   having   modified  the   terms  of   the   note to   make  war  inevitable,  the  German  socialists  reproached  him  with  having   falsified  the   Ems  despatch;  and  the   French  press   has  repeated  this accusation.  It   is   enough  to   compare  the   two  texts  to   show  that  there  was no   falsification.  The  despatch  sent  to   Bismarck  by   Abeken  in   the   King's name  is   in   a   confidential  and   obscure  form,   not  suitable  for   publication,  and ends  thus:  "   H.   M.   leaves  it   to   your   excellency  to   judge   if   Benedetti's  new demand  should  not  be   communicated  to  our  ambassador  and  the  press." The  note  published  by   Bismarck  adds  nothing  which  is   not  in   the   despatch ; it   simply   abbreviates  it.

f The  nature  of   this   insult  has   always   been  obscure.  German  historians confuse  it   with  Bismarck's  article  on   the  Ems  interview.  An  oral  tradition in   French  diplomatic  circles  attributes  to   King   William  a  phrase which  no  one  would  ever  dare  to   publish.

reply   to   the   interpellation  on   the   future  guarantees  (July   15). The   government  declared  that   it   had   called  out  the   reserves  and asked  a   vote  authorizing  mobilization.  A   committee,  immediately appointed,   listened   to   a   statement  by   the   minister  of   war, who   declared  himself  ready;   Gramont  explained  the   insult  and gave  the   committee  to   understand  that  Austria  and   Italy   might be   counted  on   for   aid.   The   Chamber  then   voted  the   authorizations. The   same   day   at   Berlin,   at   the   news  of   Gramont's  declaration, the   King   ordered  mobilization.

France  declared  war  on  the   I9th   of   July.

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.

For  general  bibliography,  documents,  and  works,  see  chap.  xxv. Recollections  of   diplomats  during   this  period   are  numerous.

DOCUMENTS.- In   addition  to   the  notes,  memoirs,  and  correspondence indicated  in   chap.   xxvi.  (Malmesbury,  Stockmar,  Martin),  the  principal  documents are:

For   Prussia:  Fosohinger,  "   Preussen  im   Bundestag,  1851-59,"  1882-84, extracts  from  the   Prussian  archives;  Halm,  "   Fiirst  Bismarck,"  5   vols., 1878-91  (see   bibl.  of   chap,   xv.)  ;   vonSybel,  "   Begriindung  des   Deutschen Reiches  "   (see   below).

For   Italy:   Bianchi,  "   Storia  Docum.  della  Diplom.  Europ.,"  8   vols.,   186572   (see   bibl.   of   chap,   xi.)   ;   Mme.  Kattazzi,  "   Rattazzi  and  his   Time,"  1881; La   Marmora,  "   Un   peu  plus   de   Lumiere  sur  .  .   .   1'Annee  1866,"  trans, from  the  Italian,  1873.- Guiccioli,  "   Quintino  Sella,"  1887   (for   the  period 1867-70).

For  France  :   D'Harcourt,  "   Les   Quatre   Ministeres  de   Drouyn  de   Lhuys," 1882  (Austrian  alliance  party);  L.   Thouvenel,  "   Nicolas  I.   et   Napoleon  III., 1852-54,"  1891,   "   Le   Secret  de   PEmpereur  .  .   .   1860-63,"  2   vols.,  1889  ; Bothan's  series  of   "Souvenirs  Diplomatiques  "   (see   Waitz,  "Quellenk.," No.   6356);   the   author,  French  consul  in   Germany,  has   collected  diplomatic traditions;  A.   Memor  (pseudo.  for  Gramont),  "   L'Allemagne  Nouvelle (1863-67),"  1879.

For  Austria:  Beust,  "Aus  Drei  Vierteljahrhunderten,"  2   vols.,  1887. Vitzthum  von  Eckstatt,  "   Sanct-Petersburg  und  London,"  1852-64,  1888; "   London,  Gastein,  und  Sadowa,  1864-66,"  1889,   recollections  of   an   Austrian attache.

For  the  Coburgs  :   Ernst  II,   von  Sachsen-Coburg-Gotha,  "Aus  Meinem Leben  .  .   .,"   3   vols.,   1887-89.

On  the  origin  of   the   war  of   1870;   Gramont,  "   La   France  et   La   Prusse .   .   .,"   1872.- Benedetti,  "   Ma   Mission  en   Prusse,"  1871;   the   documents  of the  Committee  of   Inquiry  on  the  war,  1872;   Revue  des   Deux  Mondes, 1878,   art.   by   Prince  Napoleon.-Lebrun,  "Souvenirs  Militaires,"  1895   ;   "Aus dem  Leben  Konigs  Karls  von  Rumanien,"  vol.  ii.,   1894   (memoirs  of   the king   of   Roumania,  Charles  of   Hohenzollern),  both  of   which  give   details unknown  to   von   Sybel.

WORKS.- COMPLETE  HISTORIES.- Coll.  Oncken:  Bulle,  "   Gesch.  des Zweiten  Kaiserreiclies  und  d.   K.   Italien,"  1890;  Bamberg,  "   Gesch.  der Orientalischen  Angelegenheit  "   (from  1856  to  1878),  1892;  not  enough references  in   either;  Oncken,  "   Zeitalter  des   K.   Wilhelms,"  2vols.,  1890-92, more  scientific,  very   Prussian.

H. vonSybel,  "Die  Begriindung  des  Deutschen  Reiches  durch  Wilhelm I.,"   7   vols.,   1889-94,  stopped  at   1870   by   the   author's  death,   is   the   chief work  for   the  outside  history;  it   is   hampered  by   official  respect  for   the Prussian  government  and  attempt  at  literary  style. - Friedjung,  "   Der Kampf  um  die  Vorherrschaft  in   Deutschland,  1859-66,"  vol.  i.,   1897,   in course  of   publication,  Austrian. - Jerrold,  "   Life  of   Napoleon,"  4   vols., 1874-82.  In   addition,  the   national  histories  indicated  under  chap,   xxvi., Walpole,  Springer,  Eeuchlin,  Eosen,  and,   for   France,  Taxile  Delord,  "   Histoire du   Second  Empire,"  6   vols.,  1870.

EPISODES. - Crimean  War. - Geffcken,  "   Zur  Gesch.  des  Orientalischen Krieges,"  1881;  Kinglake,  "   Invasion  of   the   Crimea,"  3d   edit.,   5   vols.,   1863, Fr.   trans.  ;   "   L'Invasion  de   la   Crimee,"  2   vols.,   1877;   Totleben,  "   Defense  de Sebastopol,"  4   vols.,  1863,   Russian.

Italian  War:  "   Campagne  de  .  .  .   Napoleon  III.  en   Italic,"  1862, French  government  publication;  "   Der  Krieg  in   Italien  1859,"  3   vols., 1872-76,  Austrian  General  Staff  publication;  Lecomte,  "Relation  .  .  . de   la   Campagne  d'ltalie,"  2   vols.,   1860,   Swiss.

War  of   the  Duchies:  See  Waitz,  "   Quellenkunde,"  Nos.  6275  to   6286. There  are  two  official  histories:  "Der  Deutsch-Danische  Krieg,  1864,"  2 vols.,   1886-87,  Prussian  General  Staff;  "   Den  Dansk-Tydske  Krieg,"  1808 92,   Danish  Staff-office.

Negotiations  between  the  two  wars:  J.   Klaczko,  "   Les  Preliminaires  de Sadowa,"  1860;  J.   Vilbort,  "   L'CEuvre  de   M.   de   Bismarck,  1863-66,"  1869.

War  of   1866:  See  Waitz,  "   Quellenkunde,"  Nos.  6321   to   6347.  There  are two  official  histories  by   the   two  general  staffs  :   Austrian,  1867-69,  Prussian, 1868;   in   French,  Bustow,  "   La   Guerre  de   1866  en   Allemagne  et   en Italic,"  1866;   Lecomte,  "Guerre  de   la   Prusse  en  1866,"  2   vols.,   1868,   Swiss; Crousse,  "Les  Luttes  de   1'Autriche  en  1866,"  3   vols.,  1868-70,  Belgian trans,  from  the   history  of   the   Austrian  General  Staff.

Luxemburg  affair  :   Bothan,  "   Souvenirs  Diplom.,"  1882. The  Council:  Ollivier,  "   L'Eglise  etl'Etat  au   Concile  du   Vatican,"  2   vote., 1879.

## CHAPTER  XXVIII.

## GERMAN  ASCENDENCY  AND  THE  ARMED    PEACE.

War  with  France  (1870-71).- France  had  declared  war  on Prussia  alone.  But   Prussia  had   with  her   as  allies  outside  of   the North  German  Confederation,  all   the  sovereign  states  of   the South.  For   the   first   time   Germany  was  fighting  unitedly  and without  foreign   aid   against   France.

England,  after   offering  her   mediation,  declared  her   neutrality on   July   19.   The   Tsar,   personally  related  to   the   King   of   Prussia and   desirous  of   ridding   himself  of   the   treaty  of   1856,   declared himself  neutral,  but   at   the   same  time  made  it   known  that  he would  intervene  against  Austria  should  she  support  France. With  Austria  and   Italy   the   French  government  negotiated  until the   first   defeats;   it   asked  them   to   prepare   for   war  without  officially departing   from   their   neutrality,   giving   out,   meanwhile,  that they   were  arming  to   prepare   for   mediation.  In   Austria,  Beust wished  to   wait;   Andrassy,  the   Hungarian  prime   minister,  caused a   decision  to   be   made  in   favour  of   neutrality;  but   Beust  did   ndt dare  announce  it   distinctly  to   the   French  government;  he   promised to   arrange  with  Italy   for   a   common  mediation.*  In   Italy, Victor-Emmanuel  wanted  war,   but   the   ministry  felt   it   impossible

*   His   letter  to   the   Austrian  ambassador  at   Paris,   July   20,   contains  one of   those  ambiguous  sentences  which  conform  to   the   traditions  of   European diplomacy  :   "   Kindly  repeat  to   the   Emperor  and   his   ministers  that,   faithful to   the   engagements  we  agreed   to   in   the   letters  exchanged  between  the two  sovereigns  last  year,  we  shall  consider  the   cause  of   France  our  own and  contribute  to  the  success  of   her  arms  to   the   fullest  extent  of   our power."  After  having  explained  that  Austria  was  restrained  by   Russia, the   Hungarians,  and  Austrian  Germans,  Beust  added:  "   Under  these  circumstances, the   word  neutrality,  which  we  pronounce  not  without  regret, is   imposed  on  us   by   imperious  necessity.  .  .   But   this   neutrality  is   only   a means  .   .   .   toward  the   accomplishment  of   our  policy,  the   only   means whereby  we  can  complete  our  armament  and  avoid  exposing  ourselves defenceless  to   a   sudden  attack."  Gramont  understood  this   to   be   a   promise of   assistance;  it   may   refer  to   the   agreement  made  by   the   three  sovereigns in   1869,   to   conclude  no   treaty  without  giving   each  other  notice  of   it,   and may   be   only   a   vague  promise  of   mediation. 813

considering  the   state  of   the   army  and   the   treasury.  It   did,   nevertheless, negotiate   with   the   French  government,  but   the   Roman question  'hindered  any   definite  agreement.  France  was  therefore left   to   face   Germany  alone.

The  war  was  divided  into  two  separate  parts   by   the   defeat  of Sedan :

I.   Both  sides  wished  to   take   the   offensive;  mobilization  was effected  in   a   fortnight.  The   Germans,  following  a   plan   of   campaign prepared   in   1868   by   von  Moltke,  intended  to   "   search  out the   principal  force  of   the   enemy  and   attack  it   where  they   found it,"   on   the   Metz-Strasburg  line.  They   made  no  attempt  to   defend Baden,   but   centred  their  forces  in   the   Palatinate.  They were  divided  into  three  armies,  which,  once  complete,  rose  to almost  500,000  men.  The  First  army,  of   75,000  men,  the   Second, of   over  200,000,  marched  on   Metz  by   the   Sarre,   while  the Third,  of   over  150,000  men,  mainly   from  South  Germany,  under the   Crown  Prince  of   Prussia,  marched  on   Strasburg.

The  French  wished  to   enter  Germany  by   crossing  the   Rhine, probably  below  Rastadt,  in   such  manner  as   to   separate  the   South Germans  from  Prussia.  They   had  two  armies:  the   army  of   the Rhine,  the  chief  army  and  headed  by   Napoleon  III.,   on  the border  of   Lorraine  on  the   Sarre,  and  MacMahon's  army   in Alsace.  But  the  active  army,  comprising  750,000  men  on paper,   in   reality   only   had   250,000;  the   garde   mobile  of   600,000 men  was  not  organized  at   all.  Mobilization  consisted  in   sending to   the   frontier  regiments  as   they   stood  in   time   of   peace,  without even  waiting  to   fill   up   their   complement  of   men.  The   regiments had  scarcely  half  of   their  full   strength;  the   army  of   the   Rhine had  barely   110,000  men,  that   of   MacMahon  but   40,000.  Napoleon III.   had   to   give   up   any   idea   of   offensive  warfare.  These armies,  composed  of   veteran  soldiers,  brave  and  experienced, were  ill-supplied  with  food,   ammunition,  and   field-hospitals,  and commanded  by   officers  who  had,   in   Algeria,  grown  accustomed to   irregular  warfare,  without  a   definite  plan   of   campaign,  without knowledge  of   the   strength  and  position  of   the   enemy,  without topographical  knowledge  of   the   territory,  and   even  without  maps (they   had   been  given   only   maps  of   Germany).  They   marched slowly   and   in   disorder,  the   different  corps   badly   mixed  together, exposed  to   sudden  attack,  without  scouts,  sometimes  even  without outposts.  It   had   been   almost  the   same  in   the   Crimean  War, but   the   enemy  was  then  in   the   same  condition.  In   1870   the war  was  between  a  small  army  of   the   old   professional  kind  and

a   great,   scientifically  organized  army  of   the   most  improved  sort. The   first   campaign  divided  itself  into   three  acts.

1.   The   Germans,  taking   the   offensive,  attacked  both  the   army of   the   Rhine   and   that   of   Alsace  simultaneously  (August   6).      The army  of   Alsace,  crushed  by   the   Third  army  at   FroeschwillerReichshoffen,  a   confused  battle  entered  upon  unintentionally  by the   Bavarians,  evacuated  Alsace  in   disorder  and  retreated  to Chalons.     The   army  of   the   Rhine,   attacked  by   the   First  army   at Forbach-Spickeren,  a   height   which  the   Prussians  took  by   storm, fell   back   on   Metz.      The   results  were  the   abandonment  of   Alsace, where  the   Germans  had   now  only   to   besiege   Strasburg,  the   fall of   the   OHivier  ministry,   the   withdrawal  of   the   troops   from   Rome, and  an   impression  throughout  Europe  that  France  was  irremediably defeated.      Italy,   which   was  still   negotiating,   decided  to remain  neutral.     She   had   made  a   treaty   of   neutrality   with   Austria, but   remained  armed:  in   order  to   resist  Napoleon's  solicitations more  easily,   she   concluded  with   England   a   treaty   binding both  to   remain  neutral.

2.   The   three  German  armies  attacked  the   army  of   the   Rhine, increased  to   over  150,000  men,  and   checked  its   progress  by   three series  of   battles,  the   most  disastrous  of   the   war:  Borny,   in   the east,   on   August   14;   Mars-la-Tour,  in   the   southwest,  on   August 16;   and   Gravelotte,  in   the   northwest,  on   August   18.      Meanwhile the   Second  army   had  surrounded  Metz  and  cut  off   its   retreat. The  result  was  to   bottle  up   the   principal  French  army,  which was  formed  of   picked   soldiers  and   was  the   only   body   capable of   checking  the    enemy's  advance.    The   Germans  left   before Metz  the   First  and   Second  armies  joined   in   one   (200,000  men), which  shut  in   the   French  by   a   line   of   intrenchments.     The   Third German  army  marched  on   Chalons;  a   Fourth  army  of   75,000 men  was  left   on   the   Meuse  to   cut   off   the   French  re-enforcements.

3.   An   army   improvised  at   Chalons  from  the   debris  of   the   army of   Alsace  and   re-enforcements  of   an   inferior  character,  set   out under  MacMahon  to  relieve  the  Metz  army.     It   advanced  so slowly  that  it   gave   the   Third  army  of   Germans  time   to   arrive; stopped  by   the   army  of   the   Meuse,  then   driven  northward,  it was  surrounded  at   Sedan,  and  the   whole  army,  with   Napoleon himself,  was   forced  to   surrender  (September  2).      There  was  no longer  a   French  army.      Italy   occupied  Rome.

II.   The  second  part   of   the   war  was   longer   and   more  complicated, but   much   less   important   from   a   military   standpoint. France,  invaded  and  deprived  of   her   regular  army,  resisted  to

## 8  1  6        GERM   A   N   A   SCENDENC  Y   A   ND   THE  ARMED  PEA  CE.

save   her   honour.  The   new  government  of   the   National  Defence improvised  armies  formed  of   remnants  of   regiments,  sailors, marines,  mobiles;  it   proclaimed  a   levee  en  masse  of   all   men  of twenty-one  to   forty   years  of   age,  and  provided  some  of   them with  arms  bought  in   England  and  the   United  States.  This  unforeseen resistance  astonished  the   Germans.*  But   the   outcome was  never  in   doubt  for   a   moment,  in   spite   of   French  illusions. The  war  was  reduced  to   the   siege   of   Paris  and   attempts  to   deliver the   city.   It   was   divided  into   three  acts.

1.   The   Third  and   Fourth  German  armies  marched  on   Paris, while  the   Second  blockaded  the  French  army   in   Metz.     The French  government  sent  Thiers,  on   September  12,   to   search  Europe for   alliances.     Public  opinion,  which  had   been  unfavourable to   Napoleon,  had   turned  in   favour  of   France  against  the   invading Germans,  who   had   suddenly  become  too  strong;   it   was  shown by   manifestations  of   sympathy  and   private  subscriptions;  but   no government  dared  to   interfere.     J.   Favre,  in   a  circular  of   September 6,   announced  as  the  condition  of   peace:   "   Not  an   inch of   our   territory,  not   a   stone  of   our   fortresses."     At   the   Ferrieres interview,  on   September  19   (see   p.    188),   Bismarck  demanded Alsace;  not  even  an  armistice  could  be   arranged.     The  Germans on  the   same  day   took  the   heights  of   Chatillon,  which  enabled them  to   bombard  Paris  from  the   south,  and  they   invested  the city.       Bazaine,  wishing  to   preserve  the   Metz  army,  made  no serious  attempt  to   force  the   blockade,  but   negotiated  with  the Germans  (see   p.   189),   and   was   finally   driven  by   famine  to   surrender his   army,  on   October  27.      On   October  31    Russia  declared that   she   no   longer   considered  herself  bound  by   the   treaty of   1856   and   resumed  her   liberty   of   action  on  the   Black  Sea. Thiers  was  sent  to   arrange  a   truce  (October  31);   Bismarck  demanded Alsace   and   $600,000,000  ; the   negotiation  was   broken  off on   December  5,   when  on  the   point   of   completion. f

2.   The   army  of   the   Loire,   formed  at   Orleans  of   more  than   150,-
*   There  were,  according  to   Freycinet,  "   La   Guerre  en   Province,"  1871, 230,000  infantry,  32,000  cavalry,  110,000  mobiles,  180,000  militiamen, 30,000  franc-ttreurs  (guerrillas),  and  1400  cannon.  See  the  estimate  of these  forces  by   a   German  officer,  von  der  Goltz,  "   Leon  Gambetta  and his   Armies,"  1877.
3. f Different  reasons  are  given  for  the  rupture:  the  insurrection  of October  31,   which  made  the  provisional  government  fear  a   revolt  in   case of   a   truce;   Bismarck's  new  demands  for  securities  to   be   taken  against Paris,  and  King   William's  dissatisfaction  over  Gambetta's  proclamation regarding  Bazaine.

ooo   men,   began,   in   October,  to   march  on   Paris,   in   spite   of   the advice   of   the   general,  who   had   no  confidence  in   his   improvised troops.  It   was  quickly  stopped  by   the   Second  German  army, which   had   become  disengaged  by   the   taking   of   Metz,   and   after a   three-days'  battle   (December  1-3)   retreated  behind  the   Loire in   disorder.  The   army  created  at   Paris,   chiefly   of   mobiles  and national  guards,  300,000  in   all,   attempted  to   march  southward to   meet   the   army  of   the   Loire,   but   was  stopped  and   driven  back to   Paris   (November  3O-December  2).

3.   A   winter   campaign  in   exceptional  cold  completed  the   destruction of   the   French  army.  The  army  of   the  Loire  under Chanzy  was  attacked  by   the   Second  army,  and  withdrew  to   le Mans  on   December  16.  The  army  of   the   East,   under  Bourbaki, composed  of   a   part   of   the   army  of   the   Loire,   was  to   march through  Franche-Comte  to   Belfort  and   force  the   Germans  to   retire by   threatening  their  communications  in   the   rear.  An   army formed  in   the   North  under  Faidherbe,  was  to   march  on   Paris. The   army  of   the   Loire  was  put   to   rout  at   le   Mans  January  10-12, the   army  of   the   North  at   St.   Quentin   January   19;   the   army   of   the East,   delayed  by   the   cold   weather,  and   stopped  by   a   small  but well-intrenched  German  force  (Villersexel,  January  9,   and  Hericourt,  January  15-18),   was  surrounded  and  took  refuge   in   Switzerland on   February  i.  Paris,  bombarded  since  December  27, and   out   of   provisions,  made  a   fruitless  sortie  (Buzenval,  January 10) ; then,   on   January   24,   capitulated.

Treaties  of   London  and   Frankfort  (1871). - Russia,  in   denouncing the   treaty   of   1856,   had   given   just   cause  for   war;   England and   Austria  protested,*  England  even  threatened.  But  not  one of   the   powers  that   guaranteed  the   treaty  was   in   a   condition  to make  war.  Bismarck  proposed  to   settle  the   matter  by   a   conference, in   January,  1871.  Russia  acknowledged  the   principle  that a   power   has   not  the   right   to   discard  a   treaty;   but   this   was  only a   concession  of   form.  The   London  Conference  annulled  the   articles that   Russia  had   denounced  and   on   March  13   drew   up   a   new treaty  restoring  to   Russia  her   freedom  on   the   Black  Sea.  The Sultan,  moreover,  accepted  this  without  remonstrance.

*   According  to   the   Crown  Prince's  Journal,  King   William  was  greatly displeased  with  the  Russian  circular,  saying  that  it   was  beyond  a   joke and  that  he   would  never  again   give   his   hand  to   Gortschakoff,  the   author of   "this  piece   of   rascality"  (ce   coup   de   Jarnac).  At   the   Congress  of Berlin  in   1878,   Gortschakoff  told   how  anxious  he   had   been,  Russia  having no  army  ready.

;  S2

Negotiation  between  France  and  Germany  was  divided  into three  acts.

1.   An   armistice  was  arranged  on   January  28,   to   give   time   for the   election  of   an  assembly  to   discuss  the   terms  of   peace.      The army  of   the   East   was  not   included  in   the   truce.
2.   The   preliminaries  concluded  at   Versailles,  on   February  26, between  Bismarck  and  Thiers,  settled  the  conditions  of   peace. Bismarck  had  demanded  all   of   Alsace,  including  Belfort,  a   part of   Lorraine,  and  6,000,000,000  francs.     Thiers,  by   his   powers of   insistence,   retained   Belfort  and  reduced  the    indemnity   to 5,000,000,000  francs.     The  German   army  was  to   enter   Paris and  remain  there  until  the   acceptance  of   the   terms.*     The   Assembly, by   546   votes  against   107,   promptly  approved  the   treaty (March  i);   the   Germans  had  time  to   occupy  only   the   ChampsElysees.

3.   Negotiation  for   the   final  treaty   began   at   Brussels  toward the   end   of   March.     The   terms  of   payment  for   the   indemnity,  the purchase  of   railroads  in   the   ceded  districts,  and   commercial  relations had   still   to   be   settled.     The   Germans  demanded  payment  in coin,   cession  of   the   railroads  without  compensation,  and   restoration of   the   commercial  treaties  of   1862;   no  agreement  could  be made.     The  Commune  arrested  negotiations;  the  Germans  remained neutral,   but   Bismarck  spoke   in   the   Reichstag  of   the necessity  of   keeping  the   army  ready.     Thiers  was  anxious,  and resumed    negotiations    at     Frankfort    in     May.      The    treaty    of Frankfort  of   May   20   determined  the  new  frontier,  the  mode of   paying   the   war   indemnity,  and   the   date  of   German  evacuation.

Bismarck  consented  to   buy   the  railroads  from  the   Eastern Company  for  325,000,000  francs  (he   had  at   first  offered  100,000,000),  to   accept  a   partial   payment  in   securities,  and   renounce the   commercial  treaty  of   1862;   but   he   insisted  that   the   tariff between  the  two  nations  should  be   lowered  to  the   rate  of   the most  favoured  nation. f

New  Conditions  of   European  Policy  since  1871, - The  Franco-

*The  King  had  consented  not  to  urge  the  entrance  of   the  Germans into  Paris;  Thiers  secured  Belfort  in   exchange  for   the   entrance  into  Paris. fThis  was  called  in   France  an   "industrial  Sedan."  It   was  the   preservation of   the  semi-free-trade  which  had  been  tried  in   Europe  since  1860 and  which  France  had  given  up.   In   reality,  as   it   was  impossible  to   impose by   diplomatic  means  a   restriction  on   the   legislation  of   both  countries, the  treaty  was  confined  to   designating  certain  nations  toward  which equality  of   customs  duties  must  be   maintained.

Prussian  war  overturned  European  politics.  It   established  the German  Empire,  that  is   to   say,   the   unity   of   Germany  under  the military  predominance  of   Prussia.  It   gave   Germany  an   indisputable predominance  in   Europe.  It   destroyed  the   temporal  power of   the   Pope   and   completed  Italian  unity.   It   ended  the   neutrality of   the   Black   Sea   and   revived  the   Eastern  question.  It   destroyed the   Napoleonic  Empire  and  established  in   France  the   first  Republic that   has   endured.  It   deprived   France  of   three  departments (1000   square  miles   and   more  than   1,500,000  inhabitants) and   created  the   Alsace-Lorraine  Question.

In   addition  to   this,   it   altered  the   ideas  of   European  governments and   peoples   on   foreign   policy.   Universal  military   service, adopted  by   all   the   great   states  on   the   continent,  in   imitation  of Germany,  has,   by   making  the   young  men  of   wealthy  families  join the   army,  personally  interested  the   members  of   the   governments and   parliaments  in   avoiding  war.  The  new  system  of   war,  with its   enormous  masses  of   troops,   its   invasions,  requisitions,  complete cessation  of   business,  and   new   destructive  machines,  has made  war  so   formidable  that   all   nations  wish  to   avoid  it,   and   so odious  that  no  statesman  dares  to   take  the   responsibility  of   beginning it.   The   representative  assemblies,  which  have  become at   once  more  powerful  and  more  democratic,  have  taken  more account  of   the   desires  of   the   peace-loving  mass  of   the   nation  and have  put   more  pressure  on  the   governments  to   keep   them  from war.

The  personal  will   of   sovereigns  and   ministers,  which  in   the   preceding period   determined  the   wars,   has   been   paralyzed  by   public sentiment.  The  influence  of   statesmen,  although  considerable in   a   number  of   cases  since  1871   (Bismarck,  Andrassy,  Gortschakoff,  Disraeli,  and   Gladstone),  has   become  less   decisive  on the   outcome  of   events.  'It   is   only   in   the   East,   in   the   countries which  have  remained  outside  of   the   conditions  of   modern  life, with  absolute  sovereigns  and  ill-trained  armies,  that   wars  and the   full   sway   of   diplomatists  continue:  the   international  politics of   Europe  since  1871   has   centred  in   the   Balkan  Peninsula  and its   neighbourhood.  In   civilized  Europe,  diplomacy,  deprived  of its   only   effective  means  of   action,  recourse  to   war,   is   reduced  to a   game   of   demonstrations  of   sympathy  or  antipathy.  Diplomatists continue   to   make   alliances,  though   deprived   of   the   military sanction;   newspapers  still   gather   sensational  news   from   the diplomatic  world;  the   public   is   kept   in   continual  anxiety;  but no  great   event  has   come  from   it. lic

The  German  invasion  transformed  the   French  idea   of   war:

## 8zo         GERMAN  ASCENDENCY  AND  THE  ARMED  PEACE.

they   saw   it   no   longer   as  an   "   expedition,"  but   an   "   invasion." The  representatives  who  direct  foreign  policy   know  that  in   no case  would  the   great   majority  of   their  electors  approve  an  offensive war.

But  the   treaty   of   Frankfort,  by   annexing  to   Germany  AlsaceLorraine,  against  the  obvious  wishes  of  the  inhabitants, created  a   new  question  in   Europe.  In   the   minds  of   Frenchmen it   presented  itself,   confused  at   first,   under  the   popular  form  of revenge.  This  was  the   old   idea  that  war   is   a   duel  between  two nations,  in   which  the  vanquished  must  redeem  his  honour. This  formula  gave   Germany  and  possibly  Europe  the  impression that   the   French  protestations  against   the   treaty   of   Frankfort arose  from  the  same  feelings  that  had  prompted  the  former hatred  of   the   treaties  of   1815.   It   is   true  that   in   1815   only national  pride   was  affected,  while  the   annexation  of   the   people of   Alsace-Lorraine  against  their  ivill   gave  rise   to   a  question  of political  justice.  It   violated  the   fundamental  principle  of   democracy. It   was  impossible  for   the  French  to  recognise  the treaty  of   Frankfort  as   legitimate,  since  it   was  contrary  to   the rights   of   the   annexed  people.  But   this   watchword  of   revenge, coupled  with  a  program  for   the   reconquest  of   Alsace-Lorraine, gave  the   movement  the   appearance  of   a  simple   territorial  claim, founded  on  national  rivalry  alone.  Even  to-day  France  has   not yet   learned  to   let   the   question   rest  on   the   rational  ground   of   the rights   of   the   people.  France's  representatives,  though  anxious to   maintain  peace,   have  never  been  able  to   declare  that   Frenchmen accept   the   treaty   of   1871,   nor  to   make  the   real   ground   of their  refusal  understood.  One  point   only   has   been  made  clear to   Europe,  which  is   that   France,  having   become  irreconcilably Germany's  enemy,  is   only   awaiting  an  occasion  to  make  war upon   her,   a   policy   expressed  later   by   Gambetta's  motto:  "   Think of   it   always   and   never  speak   of   it."

As   after  1815,   European  policy   has   consisted  chiefly   in   maintaining France   in   peace.   Like   Austria  in   1815,   Germany  has undertaken  this  charge.  Having  nothing  further  to   ask,   being, like   Austria  before,  "   saturated  "   (Metternich's  expression,  revived by   Bismarck),  she   has   endeavoured  to   maintain  the   status quo  - that   is   to   say,   her   own  conquests  and   predominance.  But Austria,  with  her   military  weakness,  had  quickly  lost   her   predominance; Germany,   with   the   strongest  army   in   Europe,   has kept   hers.

The  Alliance  of   the   Three  Emperors  (1871-76). - Bismarck's

aggressive  policy   in   1864   and   1866,   and   the   annexations  of   1864 and   1866,   all   founded  on   the   right   of   conquest,  had   given   Europe the   impression  that  Germany  was  intending,  like  Napoleon  in former  years,  to   use  the   incontestable  superiority  of   her   army   to continue  her   annexations;  the   conquest  of   the   Germanic  countries was   next   expected,  the   Netherlands,  the   German  states  of Austria,  and  German  Switzerland.  The  Emperor  had  announced in   a   proclamation  on   January  18,   and   in   a   speech   from the   throne  on   May   21,   that  Germany,  henceforth  united  and strong,  would  strive  only   to   maintain  peace   in   Europe;  but   these Statements  were  distrusted.  For  a  number  of   years,  the   little states  neighbouring  the   Empire,  Holland,  Belgium,  Luxemburg, Switzerland,  and  Denmark,  were  in   constant  anxiety  through distrust  of   the   Germans.  In   actual  fact,   the   German  government has  since  1871   made  neither  war  nor  conquest,  nor  deserted its   peaceful   policy.

The  other  powers  recognised  German  predominance,  and  the other  governments  approached  Germany  with  demonstrations of   good   will   and   desire  for   peace.   Austria  was  the   first;   the creation  of   the   Empire  having  destroyed  all   her   hopes   of   ever resuming  the  first  place   in   Germany,  she   directed  her   efforts henceforth  toward  the  Orient  (according  to   Bismarck's  advice in   1862),   and   on   this   side   she   needed  Germany  to   counterbalance Russia.  The  good  feeling  between  Austria  and  Germany, which  has   lasted  ever  since,   was  shown  in   1871   by   a   series  of   indications: Beust's   address  in   July   to   the   Austrian  and   Hungarian Delegations  on   Austria's  friendship  with   Germany  and Italy,   which  would  make  central  Europe  the   bulwark  of   peace, the   Gastein  interview  between  Bismarck  and   Beust  in   August, and   the   interview  between  the   two   Emperors  at   Salzburg  in   September. It   was  consolidated  by   the   fall   of   Beust  in   December, 1871   (see   p.   538),   and   the   succession  to   the   department  of   foreign affairs  of   Andrassy,  a   Hungarian  representative  and   natural  ally of   Germany  against  the   Slavs.

In   Russia,  public   opinion,  in   the   Slavic  nationalist  party   and in   the   official  world,   was  already  beginning  to   manifest  itself against  Germany.  The  Tsar,  a  personal  friend  of   Emperor William,  tried  to   preserve  the   friendly  relations  begun   in   1863 during  the   struggle  against   the   Poles.  He   showed  his   feelings in   a   toast  to   the   Emperor   in   which  he   recalled  the   fraternal  feeling between  the   German  and   Russian  armies  and   the   friendship

between  the   two  sovereigns,  "   the   best  guarantee  for   the   peace and  order  of   Europe   "   (December  8,   1871).

Italy,   disturbed  by   the   demonstrations  of   the   Catholic  party in   France  for   the   restoration  of   the   temporal  power,  began   to make  overtures  to   Germany.  The  movement  was  emphasized by   the   visit   of   the   Crown  Prince  Humbert  to   the   Emperor  at Berlin  in   May,   1872.

The  understanding  between  the  powers  was  shown  by   the interview  between  the   three  Emperors  and   their  ministers  at   Berlin in   September,  1872.  Bismarck  explained  the  significance  of it:   "Europe  recognised  the   German  Empire  as  the   bulwark  of general  peace."  This  is   what  was   improperly  termed  "   the   alliance between  the   three  Emperors  "  ;   no  treaty  was  concluded. Other  interviews  followed:  at   the   Vienna  Exposition  in   1873,  - at Petersburg  in   1874,  - at   Ischl,   in   the   mountains  of   Austria,  in 1874-75, - at   Salzburg  in   1876,  - and   in   Bohemia  in   1875-76.  The King   of   Italy   visited  Vienna  and   Berlin  in   1873;   the   two   Emperors returned  his   visit   in   1875,   but   did   not  go   to   Rome  on account  of   the   Pope;   courteous  relations  were  maintained  on  all sides.

England  and  France  remained  outside,  isolated  in   the   face  of the   monarchies  of   the   Centre  and   East.  This  peaceful  state  of affairs  lasted  until  the   Eastern  troubles  in   1876,   without  other incident  *   than   the   rumours  of   war   between  France  and   Germany in   April   and   May,   1875,   whose  exact  history   is   not   known. f

*   I   do   not  count  the   intervention  of   a   German  cruiser  in   the   Civil  War at   Carthegena  in   1873,  nor  the  conflict  between  Germany  and  Belgium over  the   declarations  of   Belgian  bishops  against  Bismarck  in   1875.
- f These  are  the  undisputed  facts.  The  National  Assembly  had  just voted  a   law   on   the   organization  of   the   army.  The  German  chief  of   staff, von  Moltke,  declared  that  this  law  could  only   mean  that  France  was  preparing for   another  war.  The  German  government  instructed  its   ambassador at   Paris,   Hohenlohe,  to   ask  an  explanation;  Hohenlohe  presented himself  before  Decazes,  minister  of   foreign  affairs,  and  said  to   him: "   I   am  charged  by   my   government  to   inform  you   that  it   regards  your armament  as  a   threatening  action;  will  you   take  note  of   this?  "   Decazes refused  to  take  any  action,  declaring  the  suspicions  unjust.  A   German semi-official  publication,  the  Post,  published  an  article,  "   War  in   sight," which  discussed  the   chances  of   war.  About  the   same  time  Radowitz  went on  a  special  mission  from  Germany  to  the  Tsar.  The  rumour  spread through  the  whole  diplomatic  world  of   Europe  that  France  was  threatened with   war;   Decazes  asked  help   from  Orloff,  the   Russian  ambassador, and  declared  that  if   the   French  were  attacked  they   would  retreat  behind the   Loire.  An  article  in   the   Times  said  that  the   Prussian  military  party dor

Eastern  Affairs  (1875-76). - After  France's  defeat,  Russia  had gained  a   ruling   influence  over  the   Turkish  government.  She secured  the   creation  of   a   Bulgarian  Exarchy  which  removed  the religious  direction  of   the   Orthodox  Bulgarians  from  the   Greek Patriarch  of   Constantinople  in   order  to   give   it   to   a   Slavic  prelate, a   protege  of   Russia.  The   Slavic  nationalist  party   in   Russia founded  a   Society   for   the   Deliverance  of   the   Slavs,   directed  by   a central  committee  and   sub-committees.  This  society  excited  the Christian  Slavs  in   Bosnia  and   Bulgaria  and   worked  in   communication with   Russian  consular  agents.*

The  Orthodox  Servians  of   Herzegovina  finally  revolted,  in July,   1875,   which  reopened  the   Eastern  question.  Andrassy's note  (see   p.   631)   enumerated  the   guarantees  to   be   demanded  of the   Turks  in   order  to   restore  peace;  the   note  was  not   in   collective form  for   fear   of   offending  the   Sultan.

But  the   insurgents  demanded  reforms  which  the  Porte  re- wished  to   declare  war,  march  on   Paris,   and   claim  new  millions.  In   Russia, Chancellor  Gortschakoff,  informed  of   this  by   the  French  ambassador Leflo,  replied:  "Be  strong!  You  are  too  rich  not  to  excite  envy." Leflo  obtained  an  audience  of   the   Tsar,   told  him  of   his   fears,  and  asked if   he   would  shield  France  with  his   sword.  The  Tsar  replied  that  his   word would  be   enough,  that  he   would  go   to   Berlin  and  there  express  his   wish for   the   maintenance  of   peace.  On   May   n   the   Tsar  saw  the   Emperor  at Berlin,  and  the   rumours  of   war  ceased  at   once.  Some  time  after,   Emperor William  said  to   the   French  ambassador  that  the   rumours  of   war   had  arisen from  manoeuvres  on  the  Stock  Exchange;  and  to  the  French  military attache  he   said:  "   It   was  a   plot   to   make  trouble  between  us."  Bismarck, in   the   Reichstag  in   February,  1886,   declared  that  the   papers   busied  themselves too   much   with   foreign   affairs.

These  facts  have  been  given   two  interpretations.  Gortschakoff  let   it   be understood,  and  Ambassador  Gontaut-Biron  said,  that  Prussia  had  decided on  war,  and  sent  Radowitz  to   sound  the  Tsar's  opinion;  also  that  had it   not   been  for   the  Tsar's  intervention  Prussia  would  have  attacked France.  This  opinion  seems  to   have  been  that  of   most  European  diplomatists. Bismarck,  on   the   other  hand,   has   declared  that   neither  he   nor the  Emperor  desired  war,  which  would  have  been  "   a  colossal  piece   of stupidity";  that  this  whole  incident  was  a   plot   between  Gortschakoff  and Gontaut-Biron,  both  his   personal  enemies,  to   annoy   him  and   to   set   themselves up   as  guardians  of   peace;  that  they   had  made  use  of   Radowitz' mission  and  the  Tsar's  visit  to   Berlin,  which  Gortschakoff  knew  beforehand, to   make  people  believe  there  had  been  a   design  of   war  on   foot   and that  the   Tsar  had  arrested  it.

*This  secret  action  was  revealed  by   letters  which  the   Turkish  government procured   in   1872,   and   published  in   1877,   with   the   suppression  of proper  names.  It   is   a   matter  of   opinion,  whether  the   Russian  agents worked  by   order  of   their  government  or  without  its   knowledge.

## 824        GERMAN  ASCENDENCY  AND  THE  ARMED  PEACE.

fused;  they   then   drove  back  the   Turkish  army  with  the   aid   of   the Montenegrins  (April,  1876).  The  Sultan,  threatened  by   Russia, dared  not   declare  war  on   Montenegro;  but   he   sent  an  army  to the   frontier.  The  Prince  of   Montenegro  openly  declared  war. Then  animosity  against  the  Turks  grew  so  strong  that  the war  party  got   possession  of   the   power   in   Servia  and   Roumania and  the   Bulgarians  revolted.  Meanwhile  the  assassination  of the   German  and   French  consuls  by   the   Mussulmans  at   Salonica obliged  the   powers  to   intervene.  The  concert  of   Europe  was counted  on   to   force  the   Porte  to   grant  reforms  that   would  put an  end   to   the   trouble.  But   the   Disraeli  ministry,  resuming  the traditional  English  policy   of   defending  the  Ottoman  Empire against   Russia,  refused  to   be   bound  by   the   Berlin  Memorandum, in   which  the   other  powers  concurred.  England  sent  her  fleet independently  to   the   neighbourhood  of   Constantinople,  giving the   Turks  the   impression  that   she   was  supporting  them.

Servia  declared  war;  small  Servian  armies,  composed  of militiamen,  entered  Turkish  territory  in   July;   they   were  quickly thrown  back  into  Servia.  The  Tsar,  the   declared  protector  of Servia,  had   Russian  volunteers  enrolled  and  spoke   publicly  of   a war  "perhaps  near  at   hand";  finally,  in   November,  he   demanded of   the   Turks  a   truce  of   two  months.  Then,  Disraeli having  made  a   threatening  speech  in   England,  the   Tsar  began to   mobilize  his   army   (November).  He   nevertheless  got   England to   agree   to   a   conference  at   Constantinople,  formed  of   the ambassadors  of   the   six   powers;  a   plan   of   reforms  was   drawn  up, but   the   Turkish  government  refused  to   accept   it.

The  powers  recalled  their  ambassadors  in   January,  1877,   and Russia  succeeded  in   persuading  the   other  powers  to  sign   the London  protocol,  by   which  she   promised  to   disarm  if   the   Sultan would  agree  to  make  the   promised  reforms  (see   p.   632).   The Porte  having  refused  this  protocol,  Russia  announced  that,   all the   reform  projects  having   received  an  unqualified  rejection  from the   Porte,  her   interests  forced  her   to   put   an  end   to   the   disturbances. Alexander  II.,   in   spite   of   his   desire  for   peace,   had finally   yielded   to   the   nationalist  party,  which,  under  Aksakoff, had  for   two  years   been  conducting  a   press  campaign  to   induce the   government  to  go   to  the   aid   of   their  Slavic  brethren  oppressed by   Turkey.

The  Turkish  War  (1877-78). - All  the  European  powers  declared neutrality;   England   protested  in   the   name  of   the   treaties, but   added  that  she   would  not  interfere  unless  to  protect  her

own  interests,  the   Suez   Canal,  Constantinople,  and  the  Dardanelles.

Russia,  besides  Montenegro,  which  was  still  at   war,   had   as   an ally   Roumania.  This  nominally  Turkish  principality  having failed   to   obtain   Turkey's  consent  to   neutrality,  preferred  to   join hands   with   Russia,  and   offered  her   the   right   of   passage  for   her army  on  condition  that   Russia  should  guarantee  her   territorial integrity.

The   war  consisted  of   four   operations.

1.   The   Russian  army  entered  Roumania  in   April   and  slowly crossed  the   Danube  in   May   and   June,   in   spite   of   the   Turkish fleet;   it   made  use  of   the   Roumanian  supplies,  but   refused  the   help of   her   army.
2.   The   Russian  army   invaded  Bulgaria,  and,   leaving   the   quadrilateral of   Turkish  fortresses,  marched  on  the   Balkans;  the   advance guard,   under   Gourko,   surprised  and   took   the   Shipka   pass, tried   to   descend  on   the   other   side   and   was   driven  back,   but   retained possession   of   the   pass.      The   Turkish  army   intrenched itself   in   Plevna,  at   the   intersection  of   the   principal  highroads of   Bulgaria,  and   repulsed  two  attacks  (July).      The   Russian  army saw  itself  compelled  to   conduct  a  regular  siege,   and  asked  the aid   of   the   Roumanian  army.

3.   The    siege   of   Plevna  was  long   and   bloody  (SeptemberDecember).     The  Turkish   soldiers,   mainly   Albanians,   having got    rid    of    their   officers   and    divided   themselves   into   small groups,  sheltered  by   intrenchments,  with  good   Martini  and   Snyder   guns  and   unlimited  cartridges  from  the   Plevna  arsenal,  defended themselves  with  stubborn  courage  and  killed  many  of the   enemy  (16,000  Russians,  5000   Roumanians).     The  Russian army  was  poorly  supplied  and  had  no   intrenching  tools.     They had  to   wait   for   re-enforcements  to   surround  the   place;   they   finally inclosed  it   in   October,  in   order  to   starve  it   into   surrender.     A Turkish  army  came  to   relieve  the   place,   but   was   beaten  off.      The famished  Plevna  army   issued  from  its   intrenchments,  made  an attack,    was    surrounded,    and    capitulated    on     December    10. Servia,  which  had   long   been  armed,  declared  war  anew.

4.   The   Russian  army,   in   spite   of   snow  and   cold,   crossed  the Balkans,  forced  the   passes,  surrounded  and   captured  a   Turkish army   in   the   mountains,  then   descended  through  the   valley   of   the Maritza  upon   Philipopolis,  where  it   put   the   last   Turkish  army to   flight,   January   14   to   17,   1878.     The   Russians  then   marched to   Adrianople.

## 826       GERMAN  ASCENDENCY  AND  THE  APMED  PEACE.

Peace  of   San   Stefano  and   Congress  of   Berlin  (1878).- The  Sultan, left   without  an   army,  sent  a   request   for   peace,   declaring  himself at   the   mercy  of   the   Tsar's  generosity;  Russia  set   forth  her conditions  in   the   Adrianople  protocol,  on   January  31:   independence and   enlargement  of   Roumania,  Servia,   Montenegro,  a principality  of   Bulgaria,  and  autonomy  for   Bosnia.  England was  disturbed  and  prepared  her   fleet  (January  28),   then  sent  her vessels  into  the   Dardanelles  against  the   Sultan's  wishes.  Russia replied   to   this   demonstration  by   declaring  that  s'he   considered herself   free   to   occupy   Constantinople  (February).  A   provisional agreement  prevented  a   conflict.  As   the   Turkish  government was   trying   to   prolong  negotiations,  Grand-Duke Nicholas  transferred  his   headquarters  to   San   Stefano;  there  the Russian  plenipotentiary,  Ignatieff,  communicated  his   ultimatum. The  preliminaries  of   San   Stefano,  March  3,   1878,   concluded  the peace  on   the   bases  of   the   protocol   of   January   31   (see   p.   633). ernment

Russia  had  worked  exclusively  in   the   interests  of   her   Slavic proteges.  The  English  government  replied  with  warlike  demonstrations, but   hesitated  to   engage   in   a   conflict  in   which  no  other power  would  follow  her.  Russia  was  exhausted  and  wanted peace.  The  Russian  and  English  governments  finally  agreed on  the   questions  to   be   discussed  in   a   European  congress.  To counterbalance  Russia's  acquisitions  in   Asia,  England  concluded a   secret  treaty  with  the   Sultan  on   June   4,   promising,  if the   Russian  annexations  should  be   maintained,  to   defend  Asia Minor;  the   Sultan  in   return  promised  reforms  in   those  countries and  authorized  England  to   occupy  Cyprus.

The  Congress  of   Berlin,  composed  of   the   ministers  and   ambassadors of   the   six   great   powers   (Russia,  Germany,  Austria,  England, France,   and   Italy),   and   of   the   Sultan,   met   in   June,   1878, under  the   presidency  of   Bismarck.  It   showed  Germany's  predominance in   Europe.  Bismarck  had  declared  that  he   would accept  the   role,   not  of   arbiter,   but   of   an   "   honest  courtier  "   to   aid in   the   restoration  of   peace.

The  congress  settled  all   the   questions  that   had   been  brought up   in   the   Ottoman  Empire  by   insurrections  and   wars.  All   the powers  were  agreed  on   Austria's  occupation  of   Bosnia,  and   imposed it   on  the   Turks.  Their  disagreements  arose  concerning Bulgaria,  Asia  Minor,  and  the  Danube.  In   the  case  of   Bulgaria, the   powers  obliged   Russia  to   yield   (see   p.   665).  England protested,  as  a  matter  of   form,   against  Russia's  annexations  in Asia  Minor,  and   took  the   opportunity  to   publish   the   secret  treaty

which  gave   her   Cyprus.  On   the   Danube  question,  Austria  compelled Russia   to   accept   neutralization  and   the   destruction  of fortresses.

The  congress  also  discussed  the  case  of   Greece  and  forced Servia  and   Roumania  to   grant  political  equality  to   the   Jews.

Formation  of   the   Triple   Alliance  (1879-83). - The  settlement of   the   Eastern  question  at   Berlin  had   broken  the   understanding between  the  Empires.  Gortschakoff  could  not  forgive  Bismarck for   not   having   supported  Russia's  demands.  Austria, mistress  of   Bosnia,  endeavoured  to   increase  her   influence  with the   Christians  of   the   Balkan  Peninsula  and   to   open   for   herself a  commercial  route  through  Salonica.  These  objects  brought her   into   competition  with  Russia.  The  discord  was  marked  by articles  against  Germany  in   the  Russian  papers  and  Russian military  activity   on   the   Austrian  frontier.  Bismarck  approached Austria  more  closely  to   support  her   against  Russia  in   the   East. Austria  concluded  secretly  with  the   German  Empire,  in   October, 1879,   "   an  alliance  for   peace  and   mutual  defence,"  designed  especially in   case  of   an   "   attack  on  either  by   Russia  " ; for   in   the   case of   an  attack  by   any   other  power,  the   states  promised  each  other only   a   friendly   neutrality,  unless  the   aggressor  should  be   supported by   Russia.

Alexander's  personal  friendship  for   William  kept   up   the   official appearance  of   harmony;  there  were  still   interviews  between the   Emperors  in   1879,   and   in   March,  1880,   a   toast  was  proposed by   Alexander  "   to   his   best   friend,   William."  But   the   Russian government  was  making  military  preparations  in   Poland  as   if for   a   Western  war.  It   allowed  the   newspapers  to   agitate  in favour  of   France  and   against   Germany.  The  idea  of   an  understanding between  France  and   Russia,  which  had   been   suggested several  times  prior   to   1830   (by   Napoleon,  Richelieu,  and   Polignac),   but   had   been  abandoned  for   half   a  century  because  of the  indignation  caused  by   Russian  policy  in   Poland,  began to   be   talked  of   once  more.  France  was  eager  to   find   an  ally against   Germany,  and   Russia  was   irritated  by   German  predominance. An   alliance   was  proposed   in   an   interview  with   Gortschakoff by   a   French  journalist  (of   the   Soldi)   in   September, 1879;   later  the   same  idea  appears   in   Gambetta's  declarations and   in   the   speeches   of   the   Russian  general,   Skobeleff,  in   1882.

The  Eastern  question  had  destroyed  the   understanding  between the   Eastern  monarchies  and   prepared  a   new  grouping. Colonial  policy   completed  this  evolution.  France,  abandoning

## 828        GERMAN  ASCENDENCY  AND  THE  ARMED  PEACE.

her   "   policy   of   recollection,"  sought   new  conquests  in   Asia  and Africa.  She   thus  put   herself  in   conflict  with  Italy.   Italy   since 1870   had   been  hesitating  between  distrust  of   France,  which  she suspected  of   wishing  to   restore  the   temporal  power,  and  hostility to   Austria,  which  controlled  the   Italian  Tyrol   and   Trieste. She  pursued  the   "   policy   of   free   hands,"  avoiding  all   engagements in   order  to   keep   herself  free  to   seize  any  opportunities that   might   arise.  After  the   triumph  of   the   French  Republicans in   1877   she   was   inclined  to   approach  France  and   support  the Irredentists.  The  conquest  of   Tunis  suddenly  changed  her   attitude; she   broke  with   France,   renounced  irredentism,  and  approached Austria;   the   King   paid   a   visit   to   the   Emperor  in October,  1881.

England,  on  the   succession  of   the   Liberal  ministry  in   1880, changed  her   Eastern  policy.  Gladstone,  Who  openly  hated  the Turks,  sided  with  Montenegro  and  Greece  (see   pp.   663   and   634).

The  death  of   Alexander  II.,   in   1881,   completed  the   destruction of   the   understanding  between  the   three  Emperors.  Alexander III.   was  personally  hostile  to   German  influence.  But   being   determined to   maintain  peace  above  everything,  he   took  a   peaceful minister  of   foreign   affairs,   de   Giers  (1882),   and   continued the   traditional  interviews  between  the   Emperors;  in   Germany  in 1881  and  1884,   and   in   Austria  in   1885.

The  Italian  government,  probably  to  consolidate  the  monardhy,   asked  to   be   admitted  to   the   defensive  alliance  between Germany  and  Austria.  Thus  was  concluded,  in   1883,   the   Triple Alliance,  designed  to  maintain  peace  by   a  coalition  of   three European  powers  against  the  supposed  warlike  designs  of France  and  Russia.  French  opinion  would  put   no   faith  in   the purely  defensive  and  consequently  peaceful  character  of   the

Triple   Alliance.  France  steadily  regarded  it   as  a   threat  of   war.

Formation  of   the   Franco-Russian  Understanding. - The  Triple Alliance  at   first   seemed  to   be   a   centre  for   all   the   monarchical states  :   the   Kings   of   Roumania,  Servia,   and   Spain   looked  to   Germany. England,   contesting  with  France  for   Egypt   and   IndoChina  and   with  Russia  for   Afghanistan,  made  advances  to   Italy. Even  the   Tsar,   in   his   desire  to   maintain  peace   in   Afghanistan, concluded  a  secret  convention*  by   which  Russia  and  Germany mutually  promised  a   friendly  neutrality  in   case  one  or   the   other

*This  was  not  known  until  October,  1896,  when  Bismarck's  semiofficial journal   gave   the   sense,   but   not   the   text;   it   seems  to   have  had   a war  with  England  in   view.

should  be   attacked.  This   was  agreed  on  at   an   interview  between the   three   Emperors  at   Skiernevice,  in   September,  1884.   France, isolated  and   busy   with   'her   colonial  enterprises,  resigned  herself to   making  terms  with  Germany  for   the  regulation  of   African affairs  (Conference  of   Berlin,   1884-85).

Once  again   it   was   the   Eastern  question  that   brought   a   change in   European  politics.  The   Roumelian  revolution  in   1885   (see   p. 667)   obliged   the   powers  to   take  sides.  They   all   began   by   declaring void   the   union   with   Bulgaria,   as   contrary  to   the   treaty of   1878.   But   Austria  finally   protected  Bulgaria.  Bismarck, without  officially  recognising  Ferdinand,  refused  to   interfere actively  in   an  affair  which  did   not   interest  Germany.  (He   said that   it   was  not   worth  the   bones  of   a   single   Pomeranian  grenadier.)

Alexander  III.,   who  had  become  hostile  to  the   Bulgarians, was  annoyed  at   the   action  of   Germany  and  Austria.  Russian opinion  used  the   opportunity  to   show  its   hatred  of   Germany (1886-87).*  This  agitation  coincided  with  the   agitation  caused in   France  by   certain  incidents  on  the   German  frontier  f and  the campaign  of   the   League   of   Patriots.  In   both  countries  war  with Germany  and  an  alliance  began   to   be   talked  of,   in   1887.   Bismarck replied   to   these   demonstrations,  whose  practical  significance might   be   a   matter  for   discussion,  by   publishing  in   February, 1888,   the   treaty   of   alliance  made   with   Austria  in   1879   and   by increasing  Germany's  active  army.  There  was  no  rupture  with Russia,  as   had   been  expected,  for   the   treaty  of   neutrality  of   1884 lasted  until  1890.   But  the   German  creditors  got   rid   of   Russian government  bonds,  and   the   impression  got   abroad  that   the Triple   Alliance  was  growing  stronger,  while  France  and   Russia, held  aloof  from  each  other.  Boulanger's  defeat  calmed  the agitation  in   France.  Alexander  III.  held  to   his   policy   of   peace and  confined  himself  to   the   expression  of   his   dissatisfaction  by the   toast  to   the   Prince  of   Montenegro  in   1889,   "To   Russia's only   sincere  and   faithful  friend."  But   after   the   fall   of   Bismarck

*   Katkoff's  articles  against   Bismarck  in   1886;   declarations  against  Austria by   the   Russian  superior  officers  (in   the   Daily   News)  /-interview  with Ignatieff  by   a   Servian  journalist;- Prince  Nicholas'  toast  at   Dunkirk  in October,  1887.

f Arrest  of   a   French  commissary  of   police,   Schnsebele,  on   the   Frontier in   April,   1887;   the   German  government  released  him.  The   motive  of   the arrest  has  never  been  made  clear.- The  Raon  incident,  in   September, 1887:   a   hunter  killed  on   French  territory  by   a   German  soldier;  Germany paid   an   indemnity.

## 830        GERMAN  ASCENDENCY  AND  THE  ARMED  PEACE.

the   German  government  refused  to  renew  the   treaty  with  Russia, which   expired   in   1890,*   and   displeased  the   Tsar   by   effecting a   reconciliation  with   the   Poles  in   Posen  (see   p.   506).

England,  directed  since  1886  by   Salisbury's  conservative ministry,  inclined  toward  the   monarchies  of   the   Triple   Alliance. This  harmony  was  marked  by   the   cession  to   the   German  Empire of   the   little   German  island  of   Heligoland,  which  had   been  held by   England  since  the   days   of   the   Continental  Blockade.  This was  a   tribute  to   national  feelings  which  Germany  requited  by concessions  in   eastern  Africa  in   iSQO.f

But  the   Tsar  'had  finally   decided  to   make  open  advances  to France.  He  showed  this  by   public  acts.  A   French  squadron sent  into  the   Baltic  was  solemnly  received  at   Kronstadt;  the Tsar  ordered  the   Marseillaise  to   be   played,  and  listened  to   it standing.  He  sent  the   President  of   the   Republic  a   telegram  in which  he   spoke   of   the   "   profound  sympathies  that  unite  France and   Russia  "   (July,   1891).   A   Russian  loan   was  opened   in   France and  covered  by   French  subscribers.  The  visit  which  the   Tsar was  to   make  to   the   Emperor  of   Germany  was  delayed  and  reduced to   his   passing  a   few   hours  in   Kiel,   on   his   return  from  a stay   in   Denmark  (June,  1892).  A   Russian  squadron  came  in October,  1893,   to   Toulon,  whence  it   sent  a   detachment  to   Paris; it   was  received  with   much  celebration  and   honour.  The   Tsar  and the   President  exchanged  telegrams;  the   Tsar  spoke   of   the   "bonds that  unite  the   two  countries."  French  opinion  assumed  that Russia  and  France  were  united  by   a   formal  alliance.  In   any case  it   was  evident  that   there  existed  at   least  a   Franco-Russian understanding;  the   exact  nature  of   this   understanding  remained a  secret.  England  replied  with  a   demonstration  of   friendship for   Italy;   an   English   squadron  visited  Italy   in   1893.

European  policy   was   henceforth  dominated  by   stubborn  opposition between  the   Triple   Alliance  of   central  Europe  and   the Franco-Russian  league.  Both  having  the   same  declared  object, Uafe   maintenance  of   peace,  their  opposition  has  produced  the

*   This   change  in   policy   is   known  only   through  the   revelations  made  in October,  1896,   by   the   Hamburger  Nachrichten,  which  attributes  it   to   the influence  of   England,  which  was  supposed  to   have  been  threatened  by   the treaty  of   1884.
- fThe  International  Conference  for  the  study  of   legislation  for  the protection  of   the   labouring  men,  proposed  by   Switzerland  in   1889,   and   at Emperor  William's  request  held  at   Berlin  under  his   own  presidency,  produced no   practical   result  (March,  1890).

same  practical  effect  as  a   general  understanding.  But  Russia, certain  of   France's  support  in   any  case,   has   acquired  a   sort  of predominance  in   the   affairs  of   the   East  and   the   extreme  East. After  the   Chinese  war,  she   intervened  with  France,  drawing  in Germany,  which  did   not  wish  to   be   left   alone,   to   force  Japan   to make  peace.

When  the   Eastern  question  was  reopened  by   the   Armenian massacres,  Russia  and   England  seemed  to   have  exchanged  their traditional  attitudes.  England  proposed  that  Europe  should  intervene to   impose  on  the   Sultan  certain  reforms  in   favour  of   his Christian  subjects;  and   it   was   Russia  that   took   the   Sultan's  part against  intervention  and  reforms.*  With  France's  support, Russia  paralyzed  England.  Austria  and  Germany,  to  avoid complications  in   the   East,   adhered  to   Russia's  policy;   and  the European  concert  of   1895-96  took  no  effective  step   in   the   Sultan's affairs.  Russia,  having   regained  her   influence  in   Bulgaria (see   p.   669)   and   shut   out   European  intervention  from  the Ottoman  Empire,  seems  to   have  resumed  her  sway   in   the   Balkan Peninsula.  She  has  consolidated  the  Franco-Russian understanding  by   Nicholas'  visit   to   Paris  in   October,  1896,   which gave   the   impression  of   a   complete  alliance  between  the   two  countries. German  predominance  in   the   West  is   counterbalanced by   Russia's  predominance  in   the   East;   this   is   the   new   form  of European  balance  of   power.

Armed  Peace. - Since  the  completion  of   German  and  Italian unity   within  a   quarter  of   a   century,  there  has   been   in   all   Europe except  the   semi-barbaric  Balkan  countries - no  war,  either  large or  small.  It   is   the   first   time   that   Europe   has   lived   through  so long   a   period   of   absolute  peace.   But   this   peace  covers  a   permanent hostility.   Between  Germany  and   France  there  is   conflict over   the   Alsace-Lorraine  question,  which  is   still   confused  in French  minds,  but  is   produced  by   an   irreconcilable  opposition between  two  conflicting  conceptions  of   right:   sovereignty  of the   government  by   right   of   conquest,  the   principle  of   the   German monarchy;  sovereignty  of   the   people,   whence  arises  the right   of   every  population  to   determine  its   nationality,  the   principle of   the   French  democracy.  Between  Austria  and   Russia it   is   the   old   conflict  over  the   Eastern  question,  under   the   form of   a   struggle   for   influence  in   the   Balkan  countries.

The  fear  of   war,  which  'has   become  much  more  horrible  than

*   This  policy   is   explained  by   a   remark  attributed  to   the   Russian  ambassador: "   We  do   not  wish  to   have  Armenia  made  a   second  Bulgaria."

## 832         GERMAN  ASCENDENCY  AND  THE  ARMED  PEACE.

in   former  times,  acts  as  a  check  on   hostile  feelings.  All   the nation's  have  conceived  such  a   horror  of   war  that  the   governments no   longer   dare  even  to   use  a   threat  of   it   to   carry  out  their policy.  All   are  agreed   to   adopt,   as   the   fundamental  rule   of   their policy,   the   maintenance  of   peace.

But  these  unanimous  expressions  of   desire  for   peace  are  not enough  to   reassure  the   public   mind;   for   fifteen  years   it   has   been announced  that  there  must  be   war  the  next  spring.  National distrust  is   so   deep   rooted  that  each  people   refuses  to   trust  its neighbour's  sincerity  and  takes  its   protestations  of   peace  as  a manoeuvre  designed  to   quiet   the   suspicions  of   some  nation  about to   be   attacked.  Now  in   modern  warfare  mobilization  is   so  rapid, and  the   advantage  of   the   offensive  so   decisive,  that,   to   have  a chance  to   resist,   each  country  must  hold  itself  always   ready   for war.*  The  rapid  progress  in   the  art  of   warfare  obliges  each state,   in   order  to   keep   up   with   the   rest,   to   make  over   her   war material  often  and  increase  the   number  of   her  soldiers.  The effective  force  of   armies  in   time  of   peace   is   to-day   equal   to   the former  effective  force  in   time  of   war.  The   account  of   Europe's military  expenditure  has   often  been  made  out ; but   as  yet   no  one is   able   to   estimate  the   deficit  in   production  caused  by   the   time lost   in   military  service.  The  economic  danger  to-   Europe  has often  been  pointed  out,   in   competition  with  America  and   Asia, which  are  exempt  from  these  charges.  An   International  Peace League  has  proposed  that  the  nations  shall  disarm,  and  make war  impossible  by   accepting  the   principle  of   arbitration  between states.  This  campaign  has  produced  no  effect  on  the   governments except   in   America  and   Norway.  In   Europe   it   encounters mutual  distrust  of   the   nations  and   the   difficulty  pointed  out   by Bismarck  in   1870,   of   securing  an  effective  disarmament  with the   short-term  system  of   military  service.  No   government  has accepted  the  solution  proposed  by   the  French  Republicans of  1867,   to  shorten  the  service  to  a  period  sufficient  to make  the  army  a  national  militia  as   in   Switzerland.  The German  reform  of   two-year  service  for   infantry  (see   p.   509), which  seemed  a  step   in   this   direction,  was  only   an  expedient  to increase  the   effective  force  in   case  of   war.  Europe   lives   in   peace, but   it   is   armed  peace,  peace  with   the   burdens  of   war,  and   without security.

*   Bismarck   clearly  explained  this  situation   in   two   addresses   to   the Reichstag  on  the   military  law  (January  u,  1887;   February  6,   1888).

## BIBLIOGRAPHY.

See   p.   811,   the   bibliography  of   documents  and  works  on  the   whole  ex. ternal  history.

BIBLIOGRAPHY.- Waitz,  "   Quellenkunde  .  .  .,"   stops  at  1888.  For history  since  1870   the   most  reliable  process  is   gleaning  the  periodic  bibliographies indicated  in   Ch.-V.   Langlois,   "   Manual  of   Histor.  Bibliog.,"  1896.

DOCUMENTS.- Besides  the  "   Staatsarchiv"  (see   preface,  p.   xii.),   the principal  publications  for   this   period   are  the   official  collections  of   diplomatic documents  presented  by   the   governments  to   the  Chambers  of   the different  countries  (blue   books,  yellow   books,  etc.),   and   for   the   war  of   187071,   "   L'Enquete  Parlementaire  de   1'Assemblee  Nationale,"  and  Angeberg, '  '   Recueil  des  traites  et  pieces  diplomatiques  concernant  la   Guerre Franco-Allemande,"  5   vols.,  1873.  Recollections,  notes,  and  correspondence are   rare  and   of   little   importance,  except   for   the   French  war   (see   bibl. in   Lorenz,  "   Catalogue  de   la   Libr.  FranQ.").  The  best  sources  of   information are   the   "   Annual  Register,"  the  "   Geschichtskalender,"  and  the  reviews (indicated  in   the   bibl.   of   the   different  countries).

WORKS.- COMPLETE  HISTORIES:  C.Bulle,  "Gesch.  der  N.  Z.,"   4   vols., 1886  (see   pref.,   p.   xii.),   stops   at   1885. - Oncken,  "   Das   Zeitalter  des   Kaisers Wilhelm,"  2   vols.,  1890-92,  stops   at   1888  (coll.   Oncken),  scientific  popularization, very   German,  fairly   well  provided  with  references,  may  serve  as bibl.  for  the  question  of   the  rumours  of   war  in   1875. - Hippeau,  "Hist. Diploma,  de   la   3®   Republique,"  1888.

EASTERN  AFFAIRS:  Bamberg,  "   Gesch.  der  Orientalischen  Angelegenheit  .   .   .,"   1892   (coll.   Oncken),  goes   to   the   peace  of   Berlin,  very   few references.

EPISODES:  Franco-Prussian  War  (see   Waitz,  "   Quellenkunde,"  Nos.  63696430)   :   "   Der   Deutsch-Franzosische  Krieg,"  by   the   German  General  Staff, 5   vols.,   1878-81,  Fr.   trans,  by   Costa  da   Serda;  "   La   Guerre  Franco-Allemande de   1870-71,"  20  vols.,   1873-82;  the   leading  technical  history.Chuquet,  "   La   Guerre  de   1870-71,"  1895,   the   handiest  and   most  reliable  history of   the   whole. - Valfrey,  "   Hist,  du   Traite  de   Francfort  .  .  .,"2   vols., 1874-75. - Sorel,   "   Hist.  Diplom.  de   la   Guerre  Franco- Allem.,"  2   vols.,   1875.

Eastern  wars  (see   "   Catal.  de   la   Bibliotheque  du   Dep&amp;t   de   la   Guerre  ");: Rustow,  "   Der  Krieg  in    der  Tiirkei,"  1877   ;     ··   Der  Orientalische   Krieg .,"   1877. - Lecomte,  "La  Guerre  d'Orient  en  1876-77,"  2   vols.,  1878-79.

## CONCLUSION.

## POLITICAL  EVOLUTION     OF     EUROPE,

THE  nineteenth  century  has  brought  all  the  nations  of Europe  more  profound  and  more  rapid   changes  than  any  other period   in   the   history   of   the   world.  Every   state  has   since  1814 changed  its   political  or  social  organization.  In   almost  all   *   this evolution  has   been  accompanied,  if   not  produced,  by   revolutions and  civil  wars,  and  in   several  by   nationalist  wars.  The  nineteenth century   has   been   a   time   of   internal  revolutions.  On   the other  hand,   compared  to   preceding  centuries  it   has   been  a   time  of European  peace; - forty   years,  1814   to  1854,   without  a  great war, - a   quarter  of   a   century,  since  1870,   without  any   war  except in   the   East;   between  the   two,   only   fifteen  years  of   great   wars, 1  854-70. f   These  revolutions  and  wars  were  very  unevenly distributed.  Almost  all   have  concentrated  themselves  upon short  periods  of   agitation,  1820-23,  1830-35,  1847-50,  1859-70, separated  by   longer   periods  of   calm.

Contemporary  history  begins  with  a  general  reaction  against revolutionary  France  and  Napoleon,  the  restitution  of   the   territory they   had   conquered  and   the   restoration  of   the   governments they   had   destroyed.  All   over  Europe  the   political  power  was restored  to   the   hereditary  sovereigns,  supported  by   the   aristocracy. In   almost  all   the   states  the   Prince  and   his   ministers  governed as   absolute  masters,  without  a   constitution,  without  a   representative assembly,   without  control.  Certain  states  (England, France,  the  Netherlands,  Switzerland,  South  German  States, Sweden,  Norway,  Poland,  and  Hungary),  had  an  elective  representation, based   on   property,  with   guarantees  against   arbitrary rule;   but   everywhere,  even  in   England,  the   assembly  was  practically subordinated  to   the   ministers. racy.

The  prevailing  system  of   Continental  Europe  in   1814   was,  as in   the   eighteenth  century,  the  personal  government  of   the

- *The  only   states  that  have  not  had  revolutions  are   England,  Russia, and  Sweden. 834
- ·{·There  remain  outside  of   these  periods  only   Eastern  wars:  1828.  1854, 1877,   almost  foreign  to   the   general  evolution  of   Europe.

Prince,  aided  by   his   officials;  some  southern  countries  had   even the   rule   of   the   camarilla.  The  landed  aristocracy,  which was  still   richer  than   the   rising   industrial  aristocracy,  held  its economic  power,  social  supremacy,  influence  with  the   sovereign, and,   in   the   countries  with  assemblies,  the   electoral  power;  it shared  the   direction  of   the   nation  with  the   officials.  The   army, recruited  by   voluntary  enlistment  or  compulsory  draft,   was  not a   national  force,   but   a   controlling  instrument  at   the   service  of the   sovereign.  The   clergy,   subordinated  to   the   lay   power,   had lost,   except   in   the   southern  countries,  its   former  ecclesiastical power;  it   had   become  everywhere  a   body   of   state  office-holders.

This   system  was  upheld   by   a   coalition  of   all   the   bodies  in   possession of   power.  An  official  alliance  obliged  the   governments of   all   the   great   states  to   maintain  the   settlements  of   territory made  in   1815;   the   Austrian  government,  through  Metternich's influence,  directed  the   common  policy   and   sought   to   extend  the guarantee  of   the   status  quo   to   the   domestic  system  of   all   the   states, so  as   to   prevent  any   political   change   in   Europe.  In   each   country a   tacit  coalition  between  the   sovereign,  the   office-holders, the   aristocracy,  the   clergy,   and   the   army   laboured  to   maintain the   political   system.

In   the   face   of   this   all-powerful  coalition,  the   opposition  forces included  only   the   middle  class  (few   in   numbers  and  often  dependent), the   people   of   certain  large   cities,   the   youth   in   the schools,  a  number  of   journalists,  and   in   countries  subjected  to dismemberment  or  to  foreign  rule,  the  nationalist  patriots. These  malcontents,  without  means  of   political  influence,  material force,   or  even  common  leadership,  seemed  powerless  against  the great  weight  of   conservative  forces.  In   every  country,  the mass  of   the   nation,   the   peasants  and   the   lower  middle  class,   were inert  and   unaccustomed  to   political  life   in   any   form;   they   added no   force  to   the   opposition.

This  apparently  firm  system  did   not,   however,  endure  a   halfcentury.  This  was  because  the  revolutionary  period  had  not left   merely   memories  and   regrets;   it   had   formed  a   militant  staff of   agitators  which,  grouping  the   malcontents  of   every   description into   liberal  and   nationalist  parties,   conducted  a   perpetual warfare  against  the   work  of   the   Restoration.  Their  means  were violent:  plots,   city   riots,   military   revolts,  and   nationalist  insurrections. The   governments  replied   with   prosecutions,  condenrnations,  executions,  and  a  system  of   political  persecution - intermittent in   France  and  central  Europe,  continuous  in   the

South.  But  they   opposed  to   their  adversaries  only   small  ano poorly   equipped  armies  and   a   clumsy   police.  The   revolutionists also   profited  by   the   discord  between  the   defenders  of   established order,  hereditary  nobles  and  upper  middle  class,  clergy  and office-holders,  army  officers  and  court,  and  especially  national hatreds  and  rivalry   between  states.

Everywhere  the   struggle  was  over  the   same  fundamental  questions of   political  life:   to   what  organ  the   sovereign  power   belonged by   right,   what  set  of   men  should  exercise  it   in   fact? This  is   why   party   division  has   seemed  the   same  in   all   civilized countries.  Excluding  the   nationalist  parties  and  omitting  the personal  coteries  and  special   groups,  there  remained  four  great parties,  constituted  everywhere  on  almost  the   same  plan   and with  the   same  programs:

1.   The   absolutist  conservative  party,   formed  by   the   high   officials and   landed  aristocracy,  desired  to   maintain  absolute  government, clerical   authority,   and   censorship  of   the   press;   it   controlled all   the   central,  eastern,  and   southern  states  of   Europe.     It no   longer   existed  in   England;  the   former  absolutist  party,  the Jacobites,  had   not  survived  a  century  of   political  liberty.*      It never  existed  in   the   Netherlands  or   in   Sweden  and   Norway;  in France  it   was  never  alone  in   power.

2.   The   liberal  conservative  or  constitutional  party,   Tory   and Right   Centre,  composed  of   the   upper  middle  class  and   the   liberal office-holders,  demanded  that  the  assembly  should  control  the administration  of   the   government,  particularly  in   financial  matters.    Its   ideal  was  personal  government  by   the   sovereign  with a   parliament  of   two   houses,  one  aristocratic,  the   other  elective; an  electoral  body   limited  by   a  considerable  property  qualification; the   parliament  to   vote  the   annual  budget,   but   to   leave  the Prince  free   in   the   choice  of   his   ministers  and   in   the   direction  of general  policy ;   no  censorship,  but   a   liberty   of   the   press  restricted to   the   wealthy   classes;  the   nation's  rights   guaranteed  by   a   constitution.    This   party   was   in   power   in   the   constitutional  states; in   the   absolute  monarchies  it   demanded  a  constitution,  a  representative assembly,   and   abolition  of   censorship.

3.   The   parliamentary  liberal  party,   Whig   and   Left   Centre,  recruited in   the   middle  class,   demanded  not  only   control  for   the elected  assembly,  but   its   supremacy  over  the   sovereign,  the   min-

*This  is   one  cause  of   the   peaceful  character  of   England's  evolution  and of   the   small  number  of   parties  (improperly  called  classification  into  two parties).

isters,   and   the   aristocratic  chamber.  Its   ideal  was  the   parliamentary system,   a   ministry   chosen  from   the   party   in   majority   in the   house,   governing  in   the   Prince's  name,  but   according  to   the will   of   the   elective  representatives  of   the   nation;  a   constitution recognising  the   superior  rights   or  sovereignty  of   the   people,   political liberties   (press,   public   meeting,   and   association),  and   absolute religious   liberty.   As   a   material  guarantee,  it   demanded,  on the   continent,  a   national  guard,   that   is,   an  armed  middle  class, to   defend  its   political  rights.  It   would  admit  only   propertyowners  to   the   vote,   but   tended  to   lower  the   qualification  in   order to   admit   to   the   voting   body   the   lower   middle  classs.  This   party, shut  out  of   power   by   the   Restoration,  did   not   begin   to   gain   it until  1830.

4.   The   democratic  or  radical  party,   formed  by   students,  workingmen,  writers,  and  lawyers,  demanded,  according  to   the   motto of   the   French  Revolution,  sovereignty  and  political  equality  of the   people.  It   added  to   the   demands  of   the   parliamentary  party universal  suffrage  and  pay   for   representatives,  abolition  of   all political  privileges  for   the   wealthy  classes,  and  separation  of Church  and  state.  Its   ideal  was  a  purely   representative  democratic and   preferably  republican  government  like  that  of   the French  Convention,  or  even  a   direct  government  in   which  the people   should  make  the   constitution.  In   1815   this   party,  so   far from  being   in   power   in   any   country,  had   not  even  the   right   to formulate  its   program  publicly  except   in   England,  Sweden,  and Norway.

The  two  extreme  parties,  absolutist  and  democratic,  had   the two  diametrically  opposite  conceptions  of   government  and society.  The  absolutists  wanted  a  society  based  on   hereditary inequality,  a   government  based  on  the   absolute  sovereignty  of   the Prince,  all   authority  concentrated  in   a  personal  sovereign  and descending  by   delegation,  with  compulsory  religion.  The   democrats admitted  neither  political   heredity   nor  ecclesiastical  authority; they   demanded  social  equality,   authority  ascending  by   delegation of   citizens,  a   purely   lay   state,  and   sovereignty  of   the   people. A   country  might,   however,  pass   from  one  of   these   extremes  to   the other  by   gradual  evolution,  for   the   four  parties   formed  a   continuous gradation.   The   absolutist  system   became  constitutional when  the   Prince  consented  to   grant   a   constitution,  as   in   the   German states   from   1816   to   1819.   The   constitutional  system  was insensibly  transformed  into  the   parliamentary  system,  as   the   sovereign took   more  account  of   the   wishes  of   the   elective   chamber, ity;

as   in   England  after  1830.   The  parliamentary  system  became democratic  with  the  extension  of   suffrage  and  the  assembly's acquisition  of   an   irresistible  supremacy  over  all   the   other  powers, as   in   Switzerland.  Now,   the   enlargement  of   the   electoral  body was  to   be   made  by   a  series  of   transitions;  the   transition  of   the "   sovereignty  of   the   prince   "   into   that   of   the   people,   inconceivable in   theory,  was  to   be   accomplished  by   slow  increase  in   parliamentary influence,   which  imperceptibly  transformed  its   controlling influence  into   absolute  rule.  It   is   by   this   evolution  that the   word  control  has   come  to   mean  rule.

This  gradation  has  made  possible  coalitions  between  neighbouring parties.   The   natural  tendency  of   parties   was  to   join forces  against  the   party   in   power:  the   absolutist  system  was opposed  by   the   coalition  of   the   three  liberal  parties;  the   constitutional system   by   the   coalition  of   parliamentarians  and   democrats. The   instinctive  policy   of   the   extreme  parties   was  to   take shelter  behind  the  nearest  government  party,  in   order  to advance  a   step   together.  The   French  liberals  cried :   "   Long   live the   Charter!  "   the   English   radicals  supported  Whig   reforms,  the German  and   Italian  democrats  demanded  constitutions.  The  opposition was   always,   even   in   England,   rather  a   coalition  than a   coherent  party. crats.

England  and  France,  provided  with  a  constitution,  a  parliament, and   a   political   press,  were  model  states  to   the   liberals  and furnished  the   doctrines  for   all   Europe.  The   struggle  against   the governments  began  in   England  with  the   Radicals'  unsuccessful reform  campaign,  1816-19;  in   France,  after  1816,   with  the   cry   for electoral  reform,  and  in   Germany  with  the  university  movements. Later   it   took  the   form  of   armed  revolutions  in   Spain, Portugal,  Naples,  and  Sardinia,  in   the   name  of   sovereignty  of the   people.  The  allied  governments  crushed  these  armed  revolutions in   short  wars,  and   used  the   opportunity  to   formulate  the doctrine  of   intervention  against  revolution  (1820-23).

The  absolutists'  triumph  was  short-lived.  The  alliance  between the   governments,  shaken  by   conflicts  over  the   questions left   unsettled  in   1815,  - namely,   Spanish   colonies  and   the   Ottoman Empire, - was   broken  up   by   the   revolution  of   1830.   This revolution  was  the   work  of   the   small  democratic  republican  party in   Paris,   which  took   advantage  of   the   parliamentary  conflict  with Charles  X.   to   rise   in   insurrection.  The  movement  of   1830   set up   in   France  the   doctrine  of   the   sovereignty  of   the   people,  a

parliamentary  system  controlled  by   the   property  owners,  the   political power   of   the   national  guard,   and   liberty   of   the   press.   A parallel  but   peaceful  evolution  established  in   England,  by   the Reform  Bill   of   1832,   the   full-blown  parliamentary  system,  a   truly representative  house  and  an  extended  suffrage.  The  French and   English  system,  which  had   become  the   ideal  of   the   parliamentary parties   in   other  countries,  was   introduced  into   Belgium in   1831   by   a   nationalist  revolution,  aided  by   the   governments of   France  and   England.  A   parallel  movement  in   Switzerland overturned  the   defenceless  Conservative  ruling   class,   and  gave the   democratic  representative  system  to   the   great   "   regenerated  " cantons.

In   Italy   the   movement  was  a   failure.  In   eastern  Europe  it led   to   the   destruction  of   the   Polish  nation  and   its   constitutional system.  In   France  the   democratic  party,   in   its   endeavour  to renew  the   revolution,  was  destroyed  by   its   former  ally,   the   parliamentary party.   In   the   Iberian  countries,  two   successive  quarrels over   the   succession  ended  in   introducing  constitutional  forms and   parties   copied   from  other  countries,  but   the   army  remained the   real   political   power.

Europe  was   divided  into   two  regions :   the   eastern  and   the   central states   remained  absolutist,  the   West  had   become  parliamentary. The   former  alliance  was  cut   into   two   leagues :   on   the   one hand,  France  and  England,  which  worked  in   unison  until  the Eastern  affair  of   1840,   and   on   the   other  the   coalition  of   the   three autocratic  monarchies.  Revolutions  in   Switzerland  continued until  the   defeat  of   the   Sonderbund  Catholics  and   the   adoption  of the  federal  constitution  of   1848,   which  established  democratic republican  government  all   over  Switzerland.  In   England  this was  a   time  of   great   agitations,  political,  industrial,  Chartist,  and Irish,  - huge   peaceful  demonstrations  which  failed  to   accomplish any  reform.  The  rest  of   Europe  was  almost  stationary  from 1835   to   J847,   and   France  fell   back  toward  a   personal  constitutional government.

This  calm  was  the   decisive  period   of   preparation  for   the   parties and   ideas  which  rilled  the   remainder  of   the   century.  Two   new parties   were  formed,  of   an   international  character:  the   Catholic party  and  the   Socialist  (communist)  party,  sprung  from  the former  political   parties,   but   no   longer   regarding  politics   as   anything but   a   means  of   carrying   into   effect   a   general   scheme  of religious  and   social  reorganization.  The   Catholic  party,   including the   mass  of   conservatives,  especially   the   peasants,  who   had

hitherto  been  inert,   laboured  to   restore  the   public   authority  of the   Church.  The  socialist  party,  recruited  among  the   democrats, demanded  universal  suffrage,  but   only   as  a   means  of   accomplishing a   social  revolution.  At   the   same  time  nationalist  parties   were forming  all   over  central  Europe - Austria,  Germany,  and  Italy. Founded  as   they   were  on   hatred  of   foreigners  and   on  community of   language,  incorrectly  termed  race,  they   attracted  together patriots  of   all   kinds,   from  the   aristocratic  monarchists  to   the democratic  republicans.  But  they   joined  the  political  opposition parties   against   the   governments  and   became  revolutionists.

The  revolution  of   1848   in   France,  carried  through  by   a   socialist party   working  in   the   shelter  of   the   democratic  and   parliamentary parties,   brought   into   power  a   coalition  of   democrats  and socialists  which,  at   a   single   stroke,   established  in   France  the   complete democratic  system:  a   republic,  universal  suffrage,  a  sovereign elective   assembly,   a   popular   national  guard,   liberty   of   the press   by   the   abolition  of   financial  restrictions,  and   freedom  of political  clubs.  The  first   attempts  at   socialistic  reform,  the   right to  employment  and  national  workshops,  which  the  socialist minority  imposed,  disappeared  in   the   suppression  of   the   socialist insurrection  of   June.

The   French  revolution  set  the   example  for   a   general   democratic movement  in   central  Europe;  the   governments,  alarmed  by   the sudden  agitation  and  overestimating  the   practical  power  of   the revolutionists,  either  let   the   popular  revolution  proceed  or  resigned themselves  to   making   one   in   their   own  name.  The   Kingdom of   the   Netherlands  passed   from  a   constitutional  to   a   parliamentary system,   Denmark  from  an  absolutist  to   a   constitutional system.  In   Germany,  both  in   Prussia  and   in   Austria,  the   revolution produced   new   democratic  forms,   universal  suffrage,  equality before  the   law,   a   constituent  assembly,  popular  publications  and clubs,  without  touching  the   monarchy  or   the   army.  It   was  combined with   a   nationalist  movement  for   German  unity   which  hesitated between  two   forms:  a   democratic  federation  or  an  empire under  the   King   of   Prussia.  In   the   Austrian  Empire,  the   revolution was   democratic  in   Austria  proper,  but   nationalist  in   the Magyar,  Slav,   and  Italian  sections.  In   Italy   the   Kingdom  of Sardinia  adopted  the   constitutional  system,  with  a   very  extended suffrage,  and  took  the  direction  of   the  nationalist  movement against  Austria;  the   democratic  republicans  in   1849   established republics  in   central  Italy.

The  reaction  was  brought  about  by   the   armies,  which  were still   intact   and   at   the   sovereign's  service;   they   crushed  the   democratic party   in   the   large   cities.  Begun   by   the   Emperor  of   Austria, with   the   aid   of   the   Slavs,   against   the   Germans  and   Magyars, continued  by   the   King   of   Prussia,  first   in   his   own   kingdom,  then in   Germany,  it   was  completed  in   Italy   by   foreign   armies,  in Hungary  with  the   aid   of   the   Russian  army,   in   Germany  by   the Tsar's  threats,  and   in   the   duchies  in   1850   by   European  intervention. In   France  a   domestic  reaction  brought  a   Napoleon to   the   executive  power,  then  the   Catholic  conservative  party to   the   legislative  power;  after  having   worked  together  against the   democratic  party   they   entered  into   a   conflict  with   each   other, which  ended  in   the   Empire;  France  fell   back  into  the   military absolutist  system.  Spain,   under  constitutional  forms,  returned to   personal  government.

The  governments,  having  learned  a   lesson  from  revolution, organized  an  alliance  of   all   conservative  forces,  including  the bourgeoisie,  which  was  disturbed  by   the   socialist  movement,  and the   Pope,   who   was  alarmed  by   the   Roman  Republic.  The  repressive measures  taken  against   the   revolutionary  parties   and their  instruments,  the   press  and   public   meetings,  deprived  all   the parties   of   political   power,  even  the   parliamentarians.  The  absolutist system   then   extended  all   over   Europe,   except   Switzerland and  the   countries  which  had   remained  outside  of   the   revolution of   1848,   England,  Belgium,  Holland,  and   Norway.  The  absolutist calm   reigned   ten   years,   interrupted  only   in   Spain   by   a   local revolution  in   1854,   which  restored  the   constitutional  system.

But  the   revolution  of   1848   left   a   change   in   three  states:  in France,  universal  suffrage  and  the   official  doctrine  of   the   sovereignty of   the   people;   in   Prussia,  the   Constitution  of   1850,   which, from  its   Belgian   model  and   its   revolutionary  origin,   retained  the theory  of   liberties  and   an  almost  universal  suffrage;  in   Sardinia the   Statuto  of   1848,   which  established  semi-parliamentary  government, an   almost   democratic  property  qualification,  and   the system  of   the   lay   state.  Further,  the   unsuccessful  attempts  at national  -unity   had  left   in   Sardinia  the   desire  to   accomplish Italian  unity,   in   Prussia  the   desire  to   accomplish  German  unity, and  Napoleon,  formerly  a  revolutionist,  remained  personally  in favour  of   the   "policy  of   nationality."  Napoleon  first   joined England,  checked  the   Tsar,   and   took  the   opportunity  afforded by   the   settlement  of   the   Eastern  question   to   sketch   the   national Roumanian  state  and  bring   up   the   Italian  question.  Then   the

three  revolutionary  governments  combined  against  Austria,  the conservative  power  that  was  hindering  the  unity   of   Italy   and Germany.  In   1859   Napoleon,  with  his   army,  aided  Sardinia  to begin   the   Italian  union,  by   beginning  to   drive  Austria  out  of Italy;   in   1866,   by   his   neutrality,  he   helped   Prussia  to   begin   the German  union  by   driving   Austria  out  of   Germany.  Both  unions were  completed  by   the   defeat  of   France  in   1870.

The  first   nationalist  war   in   1859   ended  the   reactionary  period. The  absolutist  system,  which  had  been  in   practice  since  1849, was  no   longer   defended  in   theory;  the   educated  public   still   disapproved of   the   French  idea  of   democratic  revolution,  but  it was  permeated  with  English  liberalism  and  enamoured  of   selfgovernment  and  aristocratic  representative  institutions.  Within ten  years   there  came  all   over   Europe,  aided  by   the   governments, a   revival  of   liberalism  which  produced  a   general  transformation in   political  institutions.  From  these  peaceful  revolutions  has resulted  the   Europe  of   to-day.

England,  by   the   electoral  reform  of   1867,   succeeded  to   a   democratic parliamentary  system.  France,  by   a   series  of   concessions from  the  Emperor,  secured  a  constitutional  government  approaching the   parliamentary  system,  almost  liberal  and   completely democratic.

Austria,  under  the   pressure  of   financial  distress,  adopted  a constitutional  system  with  an  aristocratic  suffrage,  "   the   representation of   interests."  She  then  went  through  a  crisis  of   con^ flicts  between  the   predominating  Germans,  who  wished  to  preserve the   centralized  system,  and   the   subordinate  nationalities, Magyars,  Czechs,  Poles,  and  Slovenians,  who  joined  the  oldregime  parties,  aristocracy  and   clergy,   in   the   demand  for   federalism. The   final   settlement  was  accomplished  by   separation  into two  states  united  toward  foreign  nations:  Hungary,  which  revived the   aristocratic  parliamentary  system  established  during the   revolution  of   1848;   Austria,  which  retained  the   centralized constitutional  system,  with  ascendency  of   the   German  element and  a  withdrawal  of   power   from  the   clergy.

In   Prussia,  after  long   conflict  with  the   parliamentary  party, the   conservative  ministry,  from  1862  to   1866,   took  advantage  of its   military   victories  to   establish,  as  a  compromise,  a  military constitutional  system  which  left  the   ruling   power  to   the   King and   his   ministers.  In   Germany,  it   established,  in   1867,   the   union under  a   common  constitutional  government  with  democratic  suffrage, monarchical-democratic  military  service  on  the   Prussian

model,  and   the   sovereignty  of   the   King   of   Prussia  and   the   Chancellor. The   creation  of   the   Empire   in   1871   brought   all   the   German states   into   this   union.  Each  preserved  its   constitutional system,  government  by   officials  under  more  or   less   control  by assemblies  elected  on  a   semi-democratic  suffrage. man

Italy,   where   the   way   for   national  unity   was  prepared  by   agreement between   the   revolutionary  government  of   Sardinia  and   the republicans,  was  created  by   successive  annexations  of   all   the   Italian states   to   the   kingdom  of   Sardinia - annexations  effected with   the   formal  consent  of   the   inhabitants  and  in   spite   of   the Pope's  protests.  She   preserved  her   constitutional  system,  which, thanks  to   the   abstention  of   the   Catholic  conservatives,  developed into   a   parliamentary  and   democratic  system  under  the   direction of   the   Southern  Radicals.

Even  Russia,  which  had   hitherto  kept   out  of   the   political  evolution, was   transformed  by   the   reforms  of   Alexander  II.,   freedom of   the   serfs,   creation  of   local   assemblies,  and   liberal  reforms  in justice   and   press  which  prepared  the   way   for   a   Russian  nation and   the   formation  of   a   public   opinion   to   serve  as  a   check  on   the Tsar's  personal  government.  The  Poles,   encouraged  by   the   feeling through   Europe,   attempted  a   nationalist  and   democratic  insurrection; but   the   European  governments  dared  not  give   them armed  support.  The  movement  was  put   down  in   the   name  of   the unity   of   the   Slavic  race.  In   the   midst  of   a   general   evolution  toward liberty,   Poland  returned  to   a   system  of   national  and   religious repression.

Denmark,  separated  from  the   duchies  by   the   war,   finally   issued from  the   constitutional  crisis  begun   in   1848,   adopting,  in   1866, a  constitutional  democratic  system  with  the  effective  power vested  in   the   King,   as  was  shown  by   the   constitutional  conflict from  1886  to  1892.   Sweden  transformed  her   old   assembly  of estates  into  a   modern  parliament,  and   entered  upon  the   democratic constitutional  system.

The  new  Christian  states  detached  from  the   Ottoman  Empire were  transformed  by   European  example.  Greece,  by   a   revolution in   1862,   completed  the   change   from  the   constitutional  system to   the   democratic  parliamentary  system  with   a   single   house (Greece  having  no  aristocracy).  Roumania  also   got   rid   of   her personal  government  by   a   revolution  in   1866   and   entered  upon an  almost  parliamentary  and  still  aristocratic  system.  Servia, a   nation  of   peasants,  still   under  the   personal   system,  received, during   a   regency,  a   democratic  monarchical  constitution.

Spain,   owing   to   a   military  revolution  in   1868,   began   a   rapid evolution,  which  brought  her   out  of   a   lay   parliamentary  monarchy with  universal  suffrage  into  a   federalist  democratic  republic  after the   American  pattern;  a   military  restoration  in   1874   brought  her back  to   a   constitutional  monarchy,  ruled  by   the   ministry  and clergy.

Switzerland,  by   a   series  of   cantonal  revisions,  organized  the first   experiment  in   direct  legislation  by   the   whole  body   of citizens.

The  absolutist  system,  eliminated  from  central  Europe,  confined itself   to   the   two   Eastern  empires  - taking   in   Russia  the   form of   a   bureaucratic  monarchy,  in   the   Ottoman  Empire  the   form of   personal  despotism.  After  having  been,   in   1815   and   in   1852, the   universal  system,  it   has   come  to   be   an  outgrown  survival. The  liberal  system  became  the   normal  government  in   Europe, under  democratic  parliamentary  form  in   the   west,  and   constitutional form   in   the   centre.  The   governments  themselves  summoned the   liberal   parties   to   share   the   power.   Under  this   system of   political  liberty   the   democratic  parties   were  reconstituted  : in   France  a   radical  republican  party,   in   Italy   a   radical  party   supporting the   monarchy,  in   Germany  a  socialist  party,   in   the Scandinavian  countries  a  peasants'  party.

The  two  international  parties,  Catholic  and  Socialist,  reappeared in   the   struggle.  The  Catholic  party,  once  more  thrown on  the   defensive  by   the   new  lay   policy   of   the   governments, affirmed  its   resistance  to   revolution  in   1864   by   protests   from  the Pope   against   the   Kingdom  of   Italy   and   against   modern  liberties. It   engaged  in   a   general   conflict  with   the   governments  concerning the   rights   of   the   Church,  losing   ground  everywhere  except   in Belgium,  but  bracing  itself  to  maintain  the   political  struggle. The  Socialist  party,  reconstituted  by   the   survivors  of   1848,   after an  attempt  at   international  association,  took  the   form  of   national parties   organized  under  a   permanent  management  with  a   socialist democratic  program.  It   took  this  course  first  in   Germany, where  it   occupied  the   place   of   a   radical  party,   then   in   the   other countries.

Meanwhile  the   balance  of   power   in   Europe  was  overturned  by war.

Prussia,  hitherto  a  secondary  power,  had  preserved  from  her wars  against  Napoleon,  a  monarchical-democratic  military  service, which,   combined  with   intelligent  tactics  and   perfected  arma-

ment,  gave   her   military  supremacy  in   Germany  in   1866,   in   Europe in   1870.

The   war  of   1870   ended  the   crisis  of   nationalist  wars.  Germany, supreme   in   Europe,   has   obliged   the   other  states  to   adopt her   military   system  and   has   put   a   stop   to   war   by   making   it   horrible. By   annexing  Alsace-Lorraine,  she   created  between  herself and   France  a   permanent  hostility  which  reduces  the   whole  foreign policy   of   Europe  to   a   game  of   diplomatic  combinations  for the   preservation  of   peace.  All   warlike  action  has   related  to   the Orient  and   has   been   practically  outside  of   Europe.  The   jealousy of   the   European  powers  has   prevented  a   rational  solution  of   the Eastern  question.  The  Turkish  problem  has,   however,  been  geting   gradually,  if   incompletely,  solved  by   the   formation  of   Christian states.  These,   under  political   forms  borrowed  from  Europe, are  still   agitated   by   the   rivalry   for   influence  among  the   powers and   by   the   conflict  between  European  civilization  and  national tradition.

War  has   ceased.  The   perfect   police   system  and   the   vast  military power  of   the   governments  have  made  revolutions  impossible. Each   state   has   therefore  remained  steadfast  in   the   form  of government  it   had   when  the   military  transformation  took  place; the   governments,  taking   heart  from  their  power,  have  stopped the   evolution  from  the   constitutional  to   the   parliamentary  system. France  alone  was  able   to,   overthrow  the   Empire,  which had  lost   its   armies,  and   has   established  a   democratic  parliamentary system   in   which,   after   long   conflict  with   the   Catholic  monarchical parties,   the   Radical  party   acquired  control  in   1879,   and is   slowly   paving   the   way   for   direct  representative  government. The  other  states  have  preserved  their  former  system,  parliamentary in   the   west,  constitutional  in   the   centre. ble.

The  nationalist  parties   in   central  Europe,  Germany,  Italy,   and Hungary,  have  weakened  the  opposition  by   going   over  to  the support  of   the   new  national  governments.  But   the   internal  evolution, though   slower,   has   continued  peacefully,  and   the   political parties   have  undergone  a   gradual   transformation  which  has   led them  little   by   little   toward  democracy.  The   governments  have abandoned  the   absolutist  system;  the   conservative  party   has   been obliged  to   follow  them  and   has   slipped   into   the   place   left   by   the liberal  constitutional  party.   The   parliamentary  party,  unable  to support  restricted  suffrage,  has   approached  the   democratic  pro-

gram.  The  two  intermediary  parties  of   the   liberal  middle  class have  thus  been  almost  entirely  absorbed,  the   constitutional  into the  conservative  party,  the  parliamentary  into  the  democratic party.  Norway  has  profited  by   its   lack  of   an  army  and   by   its revolutionary  Constitution  of   1814,   to   force  the   King   to   accept a   democratic  parliamentary  system.  In   England,  the  Liberals, disorganized  by   their  alliance  with  the  Irish  party,   have  been merged  with  the   Radicals.  In   Belgium  the   old   liberal  party,   faithful to   the   plan   of   a   property  qualification  for   voting,   was  swept away  after  the   establishment  of   universal  suffrage,  which  was  extorted from   the   Chambers  by   the   threat  of   a   revolution  by   the workingmen.  In   France,  Italy,   and  Germany  the   former  parliamentary parties,   being   unable  to   sustain  electoral  competition with  the   democratic  radical  parties,  have  been  reduced  to   mere remnants.  Europe  has   now  practically  but   two  parties,  conservative and   democratic,  but   these  are  much  farther  apart   than  the parties   so  named  in   1815.   The   evolution  which  has   brought  the conservatives  on  the  old  liberal  platform  has  also  pushed  the liberals  toward  democracy.  Bismarck  and  William  II.,   Disraeli, Napoleon  III.,   and   the   Count  of   Paris  have  given   the   new  watchword of   "   democratic  monarchy,"  whose  ideal  is   the   personal government  of   the   sovereign  resting  on  the   traditional  devotion of   the   people.  Permanent  harmony  between  the  prince  who directs  the   nation's  policy   and   the   subjects   who   ratify   his   acts,   is to   be   maintained  by   universal  suffrage.

The  two  international  parties,  Catholic  and  socialist,  have taken  a  permanent  place   in   political  life   and  begun   to   leaven with  their  principles  the   old   political  parties.  The   conservative party  tends  to   lose   itself   in   the   Catholic  party   or   to   ally   itself   with it   in   the   Protestant  countries,  in   order  to   restore  the   conservative power  of   the   Church.  The  democratic  party   is   impregnated with  socialistic  ideas  and,   in   the   countries  where  its   own  program is   exhausted,  tends  to  replenish  it   with  plans   of   social reform.

All   parties   thus   tend,   as   in   Belgium,  to   concentrate  into   two masses,  one  conservative,  the   other  democratic,  both  of   which tend  to   draw  their   theoretic  inspiration  from  the   doctrines  of   the two  extreme  wings,   for   which  politics   is   but   a   means.  Now  these two  extremes  show  in   their  doctrine,  and  apply   with  logical vigour  in   their  own  organization,  two  radically  opposed  conceptions which   they   strive   to   introduce  into   political   life:   the Church  remains  faithful  to   the   absolutist  tradition  of   sovereign

authority  emanating  from  above  and  exercised  by   chiefs  invested with  sacred  authority;  the   socialists,  according  to   democratic principles,  admit  only   an  authority  delegated  from  below  to chosen  mandatories.  But   the   practical  direction  of   political  life rests  everywhere  with   the   intermediary  parties,  parliamentarians or   liberal   conservatives,  business  parties,  occupied  with  practical affairs  rather  than   with  doctrine.  These  intermediary  parties, deadening  the   shock  between  two  opposite  conceptions,  maintain, in   the   midst  of   ardent  polemics,  a   social  peace  and   liberty which  Europe  has  never  known  before.

A   natural  tendency  to   attribute  great  effects  to   great   causes leads  us   to   explain   political  evolution,  like   geological  evolution, by   deep   and   continuous  forces,   more  far-reaching  than  individual actions.  The  history  of   the   nineteenth  century  accords  ill   with this   idea.

England,  Norway,  and  Sweden  alone  have  gone  through  a regular  political  evolution,  produced  by   continuous  internal  development. The   rest   of   Europe,   from   1814   to   1870,   suffered sudden  crises  caused  by   sudden  events:  i.   The  revolution of   1830,   which  destroyed  the   European  alliance  against  revolution, implanted   the   parliamentary  system   in   the   West  and   prepared the   field   for   the   rise   of   the   Catholic  and   socialist  parties; 2.   the   revolution  of   1848,   which  brought  universal  suffrage  into general  practice,  prepared  the   way   for   the   national  unity   of   central Europe,   and   organized  the   socialist  and   Catholic  parties; 3.   the   war  of   1870,   which  created  the   German  Empire,  made  it supreme  in   Europe,  destroyed  the   temporal  power  of   the   Pope, changed  the  character  of   warfare,  and  established  the   system of   armed  peace.

The  revolution  of   1830   was  the   work  of   a   group  of   obscure republicans,  aided  by   the   blunders  of   Charles  X.   The   revolution of   1848   was  the   work  of   certain  democratic  and   socialist agitators,  aided  by   Louis  Philippe's  sudden  lack   of   nerve.  The war  of   1870   was  the   personal  work  of   Bismarck,  prepared  by Napoleon  III.'s  personal  policy.  For  these  three  unforeseen facts  no  general  cause  can  be   discerned  in   the   intellectual, economic,  or  political  condition  of   the   continent  of   Europe.  It was  three  accidents  that  determined  the   political  evolution  of modern  Europe.

<!-- image -->

Lbdul-Aziz,  Sultan  of   Ottoman  Empire, 628   ;   popular  dissatisfaction with,  631;  struggle  with  "Young Turkey,"  631   ;   deposed,  631.

Abdul-Hamid,  Sultan  of   Ottoman  Empire, 631   ;   personal  government  of, 634   ;   religious  head,   635   ;   Panislamism,   635   ;   English  and  German  influence, 635  ;   turns  to   France  and Russia,  636.

Abdul-Medjid,  Sultan  of  Ottoman Empire,  623   ; interested  in   reforms, 625   ;   reform  edict,   626   ;   death,  628. Aberdeen,  English  prime  minister, 44,   footnote  ;   Spanish  marriages, 776;  Eastern  Question,  784;  Crimean War,   789.

Adullamites,  65   ;   disappear,  70.

Adrianople,  peace  of,   761.

Agronomic  Society  (Poland),  597.

Aix-la-Chapelle,  Congress  of,  748, 752.

Albert,  Austrian  Archduke,  806.

Albania,  revolt  of,   634   ;   chronic  agitation, 635.

Alexander  (Karageorgewitch),  prince of  Servia,  658   ;   unpopularity  of,

659   ;   deposed,  659.

Alexander,  King  of  Servia,  662  ;

coups-d'ttati  663. Alexander,  Prince  of   Bulgaria,  666  ; coup-(T etat,   666   ;   military  coup-d'e'tat, 668   ;   abdicates,  668.

Alexander  I. .Prince  of   Roumanians; conflict  with  Assembly,  643;   coupd'tiat,  643   ; forced  to  abdicate,  644. Alexander  I.,   Tsar  of   Russia,  attitude toward  Bourbon  restoration  in France,  103;  opposes  restoration  in Switzerland,  259;  sends  aid   to   King of   Sardinia,  332;  government,  582; death,  585;   policy   toward  Free  Masons, 719;   Holy   Alliance,  748; character  and  policy,  750;   liberal

Alexander  I.- Continued.

interests,  750;  rivalry  with  Metternich,  750;   Eastern  policy,  752;  conversion to   absolutism,  752.

Alexander  III.,   Tsar  of   Russia,  608; death,  613.

Alexander,  II.,   Tsar  of   Russia,  590; liberal  tendencies,  590;  first  reforms, 591;   liberal  reforms,  596;   return to   absolutism,   603;   Karakosof's   attempt  against,  606;   Terrorists' attempts   against,   608;   death, 608;   peaceful  policy,   788,   821. turn

AH,  Ottoman  reformer,  628;  death, 630.

Allies,  formation  and  policy,  3;   treaty of  Paris,  7;  permanent  agreement, 7;   restore  the   Bourbons  in ,   France,  103  ;  armies  withdraw from  France,  105  ;   defeat  Napoleon at   Waterloo,  113;  restore the  Bourbons  once  more  under changed  conditions,  113;  unite  again against  France  on  the   Eastern  question, 144,   389,   774;   settle  the   Belgian question   (London  Conference), 237;  questions  in   1815,  747;   HolyAlliance,  748;   French  policy,  752; break  up  of  Alliance,  761,  762; Quadruple  Alliance,  770;  Cracow affair,  776;   end  of   European  concert, 785.

Alma,  battle  of,   790.

Alphonso  XII.,  Isabella  abdicates  in his   favour,  312;  attains  his   majority and  declares  in   favour  of   constitutional monarchy,  315;  recognized King,  315;  his  government,  317; dies,  318.

Alsace-Lorraine,  taken  by   Germany, 482;   government,  510;  church,  511; parties,  512;   Statthalter  Manteuffel, 513;  Alsace-Lorraine  question,  819, 831.  See  also  under  Germany,  510.

54

Anarchists,  735.

Andrassy,  Austrian  prime  minister, 538;  attitude  in  Franco-Prussian War,  813

Andrassy  Note,  630,   823.

Anglo-Russian  Protocol,  760.

Anglican  Church,  19;   disestablished and  disendowed  in  Ireland,  71; disestablishment  proposed  by Chamberlain,  85;   place  of,   in   evolution of   igth   century,  98.

Anti-Corn-Law  League  (England),  58. Antwerp,  siege  of,   238;   Convention of,   248.

Armed  Peace,  831.

Aosta,  Amadeo,  Duke  of,   accepts Spanrsh  crown,  311;  opposed  by Republicans,  Carlists,  Unionists, patriots,  and  finally  clergy,  311;   his government,  312;  abdicates,  313. Arcadiens,  180.

Armenian  Massacre,  636.

Artote,  Charles,  Count  of,   see   Charles X.

Arndt,  in  nationalist  agitation,  394; dismissed,  435;  pardoned,  438. Arnim,  Count  von,  496.

Aspromonte,  Garibaldi's  second  expedition checked  at,   357.

Auersperg,  Austrian  prime  minister, 534;  second  ministry,  538.

Augustenburg,  Frederick,  Duke  of, Schleswig-Holstein  Crisis,  467,   798. See  also  under  Denmark,  571.

Aurelian,  Roumanian  prime  minister, 648.

Austria,  in  settlements  of  1815,  6; compensations  for  loss  of  Netherlands and   Swabia,  8;   mixed  population of,   10;   power  in   Italy,  328; undertakes  to  crush  the  Naples  rebellion, 331;   the   revolution  of   1848, 341;  the   Italian  war,  351,   793;   in   Germanic confederation,  375;  government, 378;   absolutism,  380,   382; territorial  questions  affecting  new constitution,  394;  Great  Germany party,  394;  shut  out  of  German Empire  and  breaks  with  Frankfort Parliament,  395;   Frankfort  Conference, 397;   Dresden  Conference,  398; reestablishment  of  old  confederation, 398;   directs  Diet,   398;   condition in   1814,   401;   German  predominance, 403;   Metternich's  system, 4°3I   Josephism,  406;   no  public   interest in   politics,  406;   national  opposition in   Hungary,  406;  dualism,  406;

Austria - Continued.

Hungarian  constitution,  406;  national opposition  in   Slavic  countries, 409;  Liberal  German  opposition, 411;  weakening  of   Metternich  system, 411;   Cracow  Republic,  412; revolution  of   1848,   413;   Metternich resigns,  413;   Academic  Legion  and Central  Committee  for  Defence  of Popular  Rights,  413;   Emperor  flees, 413;  Archduke  John  forms  new ministry,  414;   Assembly  of   1840   and its  work,  414;  Hungary  granted independent  government,  414  ; Slavic  revolution,  414;  Panslavic Congress,  415;  breaks  with  Hungarian revolutionists,  417;  uses Slavs  against  Magyars,  417;   Lambert's nomination,  417;   Viennese troops  march  on  Hungary,  417; Vienna  campaign,  418;  absolutist system  restored,  418;  aristocratic system  restored,  421;   Concordat  of 1855,  422;   fall  of   Josephism,  422; political  life  ceases,  423;   financial disorder,  423;  remains  outside  Zollver*in,  454;   Bismarck's  diplomacy toward,  467;   induced  to   join   Bismarck, 468;   takes   Holstein  (Gastein Convention),  469;   confederation  dissolved, 470;   Austro-Prussian  War, 470,  801;  treaty  of  Prague,  472; Emperor  recognises  "   hereditary abuses,"  518;  reenforced  council, 518;   parties,  519;   "historic  rights," 520;   Constitution  of   October,  1860, 520;   Constitutionof '61,521;  distribution of   seats  in   House  of   Representatives, 522;   attempt  at   unitary   government, 522;   national  resistance  in Hungary  and  Venetia,  523;  Hungary's demands,  524;   Croats,  Czechs, and  Poles  withdraw  from  Reichsrath,  524;  constitution  suspended, 525;   Emperor  restores  dualism  and negotiates  with  Hungary,  525; Hungarian  compromise,  526;   Cisleithania,  526;   government  under  the Union,  527;  Liberal  constitutions of   1867,   528;   distribution  of   seats  in Reichsrath,  529,   footnote;  political conditions,  529;  race  complications, 530;  proportion  of   races  in   Empire, 531;  political  and  national  parties, 531;  government  of  Liberals,  534; religious  laws,   535;  conflict  between Church  and  State,  535;  financial and  military  reorganization,  535;

Austria - Continued,

Austro-Prussian  War,  470,   801.

Slavic  nationalist  movements,  536; attempt  at   federalist  constitution, 537;  opposition  withdraws  from Reichsrath,  537;  electoral  reform, 538;  distribution  of  seats,  539; constitutional  ministries,  540;   "May Laws,"  540;  political  clubs,  540; liberal  program,  542;  condition  of army,  542;  national  unity   agitation, 543;   Bosnia  crisis,  543;   Slavic  agitation, 544;   Emperor  deserts  constitutional party,   544;   negotiation with  Czechs,  544;   balance  of   parties upset,  545;   federalist  policy   of   Taaffe ministry,  545;   Germans  unite,  546; Czech  evolution,  547;   Germans  and Poles  unite,  548;  electoral  reform of   1896,   548,   549;   political  evolution in   nineteenth  century,  552;   Polish insurrection,  600;   Austria  in   Holy Alliance,  748;   Polish  question,  768; intervention  in  Italy,  768;  Mtinchengraetz  interview,  770;  absolutist alliance,  771;   Italian  affair,   777; Swiss  affair,  777;  restoration  after revolution  of  '48,   780;  refugees, 781;  triumphs  over  Prussia,  781; recognition  of   French  Empire,  783; reduced  to  defensive  policy,  788; severs  diplomatic  relations  with Sardinia,  793;  Zurich  treaty,  796; connection  with  Polish  affairs,  797; Italy  and  Prussia  unite  against, 800;   policy,  800;   interview  between Emperor  and  Napoleon,  804;  Napoleon proposes  triple   alliance,  805; Franco-Prussian  War,  813;   alliance of   three  Emperors,  821;  Austria's part   in   Berlin  Congress,  826;   Triple Alliance  formed,  827;   armed  peace, 831;   share  in   political  evolution  of Europe,  842.

Baden,  constitution  under  Germanic Confederation,  379;  political  revival, 387;   decrees  of   1832,   388; revolution  of   1848,   390;   Republican rising  396;   supports  Prussia  in   the union  agitation,  466;   joins   Austria against  Prussia,  471;  supported  by Russia,  751-

Badeni,  Austrian  prime  minister,

Baden,  Articles  of,   condemned  by Pope,  265.

549. Bakounine,    in    Panslavic    Congress,

Bakounine- Continued.

415;  on  repression  of  Polish  national movement,  600;   brings  socialism into   Russia,   606;   the   International, 730;   contest  with  Marx, 73°&gt;   founds  Anarchist  party,  735. Balkan  Peninsula,  condition  of  na- tions in   1814,   638;   centre  of   inter-

Balta-Liman  treaty,  642.

national politics   since   1871,   819.

Banffy,  Austrian  prime  minister,  550. Barbes,  French  Republican,  139;   Socialist leader,   163.

Barcelona,  burning  of  monasteries and  massacre  of   monks  by   Spanish Progressists,  299;  revolt  of  Progressists, 303;   Republican  party proclaims  a  republic,  303;  bombarded by   Espartero,  303;  revolt  of working  men,  307.

Basque  provinces,  position  in  the Spanish  monarchy,  300;  government, 300;   support   Don   Carlos,  300; make  peace  with  the  government for   maintenance  of   privileges,  303; in   second  Carlist  war,  314;  condition regulated  by   Constitution  of 1876,   316.

Bazaine,  French  general,  189,   816. Beaconsfield,  see  Disraeli.

Bavaria, Constitution  under  Germanic Confederation,  379;  political  revival, 387;   revolution  of   1848,   390; King  rejects  election  of   Prussian King  as   Emperor,  395;   Zollverein, 454;   joins   Austria  against  Prussia, 47r»  783;   concordat  with  Pope,   690; supported  by   Russia,  751.

Belcredi,  Austrian  prime  minister,

Belgian  Railroad  Purchase,  805.

526. Belgium,  formation  of  Kingdom  of the   Netherlands,  229;  social  conditions in   1814,   229;  effects  of   French occupation,  229  ;   neutrality,  230  ; government  under  Fundamental Law,  230  ;   opposition  to  Dutch government,  230;  Doctrinal  Judgment, 231;   Catholic  Liberal  Union, 233;   Revolution  of  1830,  234,  762; Belgian  Congress,  234;   independent Kingdom  founded,  234;   Leopold  of Coburg  chosen  King,  235;  settlements of   London  Conference,  237, 766;   siege   of   Antwerp,  238;   parties, 244;   financial  crisis,  245;   Education Act  of   1842,  245;   Liberal  Alliance, 246;  struggles  between  Catholics

Belgium - Continued.

political  parties,  255.

and  Liberals,  246   ;   Popes  condemn constitution,  248;   Liberals  in   power, 248   ;   revolution  of   '48,   248   ;   Antwerp Convention,  248;  "Young Liberals"  or  Progressists,  and Doctrinaires,  249  ;   army  question, 249  ;   bishops  support  Pope,  250; Liberal  Federation,  250  ;   School Law,  250;  universal  suffrage  established, 252;   attempts  to   reconstitute Liberal  Union,  Orban  and  Janson, 253  ;   Democratic  demonstrations, 253   ; Nyssen's  project,  254;  present

Belleville  Program,  182,   183.

Bern,  419.

Benedetti,  809.

Bsresford,  English  general,  establishes dictatorship  in   Portugal,  319; refused  admittance  on  return  from Brazil,  320.

Berg,  Danish  Democratic  leader,  575. Berlin,  peace  of,   661.

Berlin,  Conference  of,   396,   782;   mem- orandum, 632,   824;   Treaty  of,   770. Berlin,  Congress  of,   826;  Disraeli takes  part   in,   76;   Austria  invited to   occupy  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina, 544;  dismemberment  of  Ottoman Empire,  634;   compensation  for   Roumania,  647;   settlement  of   Bulgaria, 665.

Bermudez  Zea,  Spanish  absolutist minister  under  Christina,  296. Bernadotte,  see  Charles  XIV.  of   Swe-

den.

Berri,  Due  de,   assassination  of,   121,

755Berryer,  leader  of  Legitimists (France),  166;  the  deficit,  177.

Bessarabia,  restored  to  Moldavia,

642;   taken  by   Russia,  646.

Beust.von,  Austrian  prime  minister, 526;  fall  of,   538;   foreign  policy, 805;   in   Franco-Prussian  War,  813. Biarritz  interview,  800.

Bismarck,  Prussian  prime  minister, interview  with  Favre  at   Ferrieres, 189;   report  on   Frankfort  Diet,  398; first  ministry,  461   ;   policy,  461   ; House  protests  against  foreign policy,  464;  plan  for  union,  466; duchies  crisis,  466;   diplomacy,  467; induces  Austria  to  join   him,  468; modifies  his  policy,  480;   economic reforms,  480   ;   Guelph  Fund,  481; Customs  Parliament,  481;  govern-

## Bismarck - Continued.

ment  as   Chancellor  of   Empire,  489; joins  National  Liberals  against Catholics,  491;   Culturkampf,  492; attempt  to  assassinate,  493;   "   Bismarck's party,"   494;   military,  penal, and   press   laws,   495;   Liberal reforms,  495;  financial  measures, Imperial  Bank  established,  495  ; Count  von  Arnim  agitation,  496; Bleichroeder  Era,  496   ;   struggle against  Socialists,  497   ;   economic and  social  policy,  498 ;   Economic Council,  500;  coalition  of   Conservatives and   Catholics,  501;   colonial policy,  501;   Army   Law,   502;   Cartel, 502;   importance  to   William  L,   502; beginning  of  movement  against, 503;  Frederick's  diary,  503;  continues to  govern  under  William  II., 504;  rupture  with  Emperor,  505; resigns,  505;  war  against  Caprivi, 508;  trip   to   Vienna,  508;   AlsaceLorraine,  510;   leads  European  policy, 789;   Biarritz  interview,  799; alliance  with  Italy,  800;  AustroPrussian  war,  801;  secret  interview with  Napoleon,  803;   declaration  of Franco-Prussian  war,  807;  London and  Frankfort  treaties,  817;   interviews of   three  Emperors,  822.

Black  Sea,  declared  neutral,  792  ; Russia  regains  freedom  in,   817.

Blanc,  Louis,  French  Socialist,  141; theory  of  national  workshops,  141; draws  up  program  of  Democratic party,  150;   in   the  provisional  government of   the   Republic,  159; rights   of   labour,  160;   national  workshops established  by   decree  of   provisional government,  160;   outbreak by   clubs,  163;   "Days  of   June," 163;   socialistic  schools,  722.

Blanqui,  French  Republican,  organizes insurrection,  139  ;   Socialist leader,  163;   Commune  of  Paris, 188.

Bleichroeder  Era,   496.

Bohemia,  Czech  national  opposition to   Austrian  rule,   410;   Panstavtsm, 410;  revolution  of   1848,  414;   Panslavic  Congress,  415  ;   centre  of Czech  national  movement,  532;   demand for   personal  union,  536;   Austria negotiates  with,  544;   Czechs unite  against  Germans,  545;  agitations, 545;   evolution  of   Czechs,  547. Bordeaux,  Compact  of,   190. tria

Borne,  387.

Bosnia  Crisis,  543.  See  also  under Ottoman  Empire^   634.

Bourgeois,  French  prime  minister (Radical),  220;  program,  220.

Bosporus,  Strait  of,  opened,  620  ; Straits  Convention,  623. Boulanger  Crisis,  213,   829.

Brandenburg,  Duke  of,  Prussian prime  minister,  446.

Bratiano,  Roumanian  prime  minister, 645.

Bravo,  Gonzalez,  Spanish  minister, 309-

Bresson  (Spanish  marriages),  304,  775. Bright,  John,  Radical  leader,  heads free  trade  movement,  58;   his  program, 70.

Cairoli,  Italian  prime  minister,  365. : Camarilla  of   Spain,  restored  in   1815, 290;  succeeded  by   a  ministry,  298   · forms  again  about  Christina,  and governs  without  ministerial  control, 305;  under  Isabella,  308.

Brisson,  French  prime  minister,  213; candidate  for  presidency,  220. Broglie,  French  minister,  press  law of   1819,   120;  unites  with  Republicans against   Charles'  government, 127;  party  of   resistance,  134;  minister under   MacMahon,  197;   "   Moral Order"  government,  197   ;   ministry defeated,  201;   second  ministry, 206;   resigns,  207.

Brunswick,  constitution  granted,  387; action  on   Zollverein,  454.

Buffefc,  French  prime  minister,  parliamentarian influence,   181;   president of   National  Assembly,  197   ; forms  ministry,  201.

Bulgaria,  revolt  of   peasants,  631,   665; insurrection  put   down  by   BashiBazouks,  Bulgarian  atrocities,  631, 665;   Congress  of   Berlin,  634;   Bulgarian people   before  1885,   664   ; Church  affairs,  665;   constitution  of 1869,   665;   Alexander  of   Battenberg chosen  prince,  666;  parties,  666; coup   d'Jtat,  666  ;   protest  against Russians,  667;  union  with  Roumelia,   667;   conditions  since  union, 667;  political  transformation,  667; struggle  for  the   union,  668;   Europe imposes  peace,  668;  military  coup d'/tat,  668;   Ferdinand  of   Coburg chosen  prince,  669 ;   attempts  of Russian  party  against  Stambouloff, 669;   Ferdinand  recognized  by   Sultan, 669;   revision  of   constitution, 669;   Stambouloff  assassinated,  669; reconciled  with  Russia,  669;   Macedonian agitation,   669.

Bukovina,  centre  of  Roumanian  national movement,  532.

Bull  of   1814,   689.

Bulwer  (Spanish  marriages),  304,  775. Burschenschaft,  383,   385.

Cabral,  Costa,  leader  of  Portuguese Chartists,  322.

Cabrera,  Carlist  general,  302;  continues the   Carlist   war   in   Catalonia after  peace   is   made,   303. Cadiz,  siege     of,   294,   759.

!   Campos,  Martinez,  proclaims  the Spanish  restoration  of   1874   by/ronundamento,  315  ;   makes  terms  of peace  with  Cuban  insurgents,  316, footnote;  unites  with  Sagasta  in the   government,  318.

Canning,  detaches  England  from Holy  Alliance,  31;  prime  minister, 34;   favours  Catholic  emancipation, 34;   English  policy  under,  759;  at Congress  of  Verona,  7*9;  death,

Canning,  Stratford,  784.

760. Canovas  del  Castillo,  Spanish  minister under  Alphonso  XII.,  315; leader  of   Conservative  party,  317; abandoned  by   the  king   in   conversion of   the   debt,   318;   restored,  and fights  against  Republican  press,

318. Canrobert,  French  general  in   Crimean war,  790;   Italian  war,  795. Cantonists,  revolt  of   (Spain),  313.

Capodistrias,  head  of   Greek  government, 652;   despotism,  652;   assassinated, 652.

Caprivi,  German  Chancellor,  505  ; resigns  Prussian  prime  ministership,  508   ;   Bismarck's  opposition, 508;   disputes  with  Eulenberg,  509; resigns  chancellorship,  509;  policy in   Alsace-Lorraine,  514.

Carbonari,  organization  and  aims, 329;  persecution,  331;  uprising  in Naples,  334;  struggle  against  Pope,

692. Carignano,  Charles  Albert,  prince  of, part   in   the   Sardinian  rebellion,  332; appointed  regent  by   Victor  Emmanuel, 332   ;   succeeds  to  throne  of Sardinia,  332;   his  motto,  337;  Re Tentenna,  338 ;   conflict  with  Austria,

Carignano - Continued.

338;   his  reforms,  339;  grants  the Constitutional  Statute,  340;  revolution of   1848,   340;   begins   national war  again  in   1849,   344;  abdicates,

344Carlier,  167.

Carlists,  composition  of  the  party, 296 ;   Carlists  and  Christinas,  297; the  Carlist  war,  300  ;   Carlist  army and  tactics,  301;  division  of  the party,  302;  end  of   this  war,  303; gradually  abandoned  by   the  absolutists, 365  ;   revolt  for   the   defence "of   religion,"  307   ;   declare themselves  in   favour  of   "   the  national kingship"  and  "unity  of faith,"  in   1868,  311  ;   led  by   the priests,  revolt  against  Serrano's regency,  311;  revolt  against  Amadeo,   312;  repetition  of   first  Carlist war  under  the  Republic,  314;   Carlist army   forced  to  take  refuge  in France,  315;  end  of   second  Carlist war,  316   ;   present  condition  of party,  317. fence

Carniola,  centre  of  Slovenian  na-

Carlsbad  Decrees,  385. tional movement,  532.

Carnot,  president  of   French  Republic, 214;  assassinated,  219.

Carrel,  Armand,  128,   140.

Cartel,  502.

Casimir-Perier,  French  prime  minister, party   of   resistance,  134;   policy of   his   ministry,  136.

Casimir-Perier,  prime  minister  and president  of   French  Republic,  220; personal  quarrel  with  socialists, 220;  resigns,  220.

Castelar,  Spanish  minister  and  orator under  the  Republic,  313;  president of   Spanish  Republic,  314;   his   system of   military  dictatorship,  314; resigns,  314;   leader  of   Possibilists,

318. Catalonian  Junta,  293.

Catholic  Church,  condition  before French  Revolution,  684;   Toleration and  Parity,  686;   the  Revolution  in the   Church,  687;   "   enlightened  despotism," 688   ;   Concordat  of  1801 and  organic  articles,  688;   restoration of,   689   ;   Bull  of   1814,  689   ; transformation  of,   691;   Ultramontane party,   691;   evolution  of   French national  church,  691;  government of  Rome,  692 ;   Liberal  Catholic

Catholic  Church - Continued.

party,  692;   Mirari  Vos,   693;   Catholic Democracy,  694;   revolution  of 1848,  696;   reaction,  696;   Nostis  et Nobiscum,  696   ;   Josephism  abandoned, 697;   Concordat  of   1855,   697; doctrine  of   Immaculate  Conception proclaimed,  698;   Quanta  Ciira,  699; Syllabus,  701;   Vatican  Council,  704; doctrine  of  Infallibility  adopted, 706   ; Anti-infallibilists,  705   ;   Inopportunists,  705  ;   Pastor  jEternus Bull,  706   footnote;  separation  of Church  and  State  in  Italy,  707  ; Church  of  Old  Catholics  formed, 707;   law   of   Papal   guarantees,  708; Austria  abrogates  Concordat  of 1855,  708;   Peter's  Pence,  710;   Leo XIII.  elected,  710;   his   encyclicals, 711;   his   policy,  714;   Culturkampf, 714;   Leo  XIII.  interferes  in   domestic policy,   715;   encyclical  for   Catholic union,   716;   new  powers  of,   716. Catholic  Emancipation  (England),  33. Catholic  Liberals,  Belgian  Union  or, 233;   demands  of   the  party,  692;   in Ireland,  693;   in   Belgium,  693.

Cavaignac,  Godefroy,  129;   formation of   Communist  Socialist  party,  140; invested  with  dictatorial  power  by Constituent  Assembly,  163^  candidate for   presidency,  165.

Cavour,  Italian  minister,  favours  revolution of   1848,   341;   description  of, 348;   his   policy,  349;  agreement  of Plombieres,  351;  Roman  question, 357   ;   September  Convention,  357  ; death,  359  ;   foreign  policy,  788   ; leads  European  policy,  789;   makes alliance  with  Napoleon,  793.

Chamberlain,  Radical  leader,  85;   proposes disestablishment  of   Anglican Church,  85 ; leader  of   Liberal  Unionists in   House  of   Commons,  97; government's  man  of   action,  97.

Chambord,  Count  of,   birth  secures Bourbon  succession,  122  ;  recognised by   Right  as   Henry  V.,   199. Changarnier,  168.

Charbonnerie,  in   revolutionary  agitation, 122;   "   four  sergeants  of   Rochelle,"  122;  organization  of,   719. Charles  Albert,  King   of   Sardinia,  see under  Carignane.

Charles  I.,   prince  of   Roumania,  644; builds  up   army,  646.

Charles  X.,   Bourbon  restoration,  104, 105;   Beugnot  on  the  return  of,   112;

## Charles  X. - Continued.

the   Entresol  ministry,  112;   flees  to Belgium  in   the   Hundred  Days,   113; second  restoration,  113  ;   leader  of Ultras,  115  ;   becomes  king   (1824), 124;  works  toward  restoration  in harmony  with  chamber  and  ministry, 124;   exercises  royal   prerogative in   choice  of   ministers,  126;  forms an   Ultra  ministry  under  Polignac, 126;   opposition  to,   127;  open  conflict with   the   chamber,  128;   determines on   a   coup   d'etat,   128;   July revolution,  130;  decides  to  make terms  with  insurgents,  130;  abdicates in   favour  of   his   grandson,  132. to  throne,  554   ;   conflict  with  Nor-

Charles  XV.,  King   of   Sweden,  561.

Charles  XIV.  of   Sweden,  made  heir way, 561.

Charter  (France),  106;   Pope   protests against,  690.

Chartist  agitation  (England),  51-55; Disraeli's  sympathy  with,  75.

Commons,  House  of  - Continued.

sition    to   Salisbury's  Irish    policy, 88;   evolution   in     igth    century,  97; Commune  of   Paris,  188  ;   government of,   191.

Communication,  new  methods  of,   676.

Concordat  of   1801  (France),  688;   Concordat of   1851   (Spain),   305   ;   Concordat of   1855   (Austria),  421,   697; abrogated,  534,  708.

Communists,  192,  723;  alliance  of, 723  ;   manifesto  of,   724  ;   program of,   725,   footnote.

j Congregation,  French  Catholic  party, formation,  120;   denounced  by   Montosier,  124.

Consorteria,  361;   financial  measures and  restoration  of  the  grist   tax, 361   ;   adjustment  of   relations  with Pope  after  taking  of  Rome,  362; sympathy  with  France,  362;  attitude in   latent  conflict  between France  and  Prussia,  805.

Chosrew  Pasha,  Grand  Vizier  of ! Ottoman  Empire,  622;  attempts  to! regain  Syria,   623,   773.

Christian  IX.,   King   of   Denmark,  571; victory  over  Folkething  in   constitutional conflict,   576,

Christines  (Spain),   297.

Constant,  Benjamin,  intellectual  restoration in   France,  109  ;   draws  up a   liberal  constitution  for   Napoleon in   Hundred  Days,  113.

Christian  VIII,  King  of  Denmark, 567.

Constantinople,  Conference  of,   632,

Constantine,  Viceroy  of   Poland,  584; recognised  by   Nicholas  as  Tsar of  Russia,  585;  reappointed  Viceroy, 598.

633,   824. Constituent  Assembly  (France),  162. Coral',  649.

Cortes  of  Portugal,  powers  under charter  of   1826,  320.

Corn  Laws  (England),  22;  sliding scale  adopted,  32;  repealed,  59. Corporation  Act,  repeal  of,   34.

Cortes  of  Spain,  manifesto  against them  presented  to  Ferdinand  by Serviles,  289;   hall  closed  and  records seized,  289  ;   Cortes  of  1820, 292   ;   struggles  with  Ferdinand  in 1803,  294;  convoked  in   the   old   form in  1833  to  recognise  Isabella  as Queen,  296;   regulations  of   Christina's Statute  of   1834,   297;   subsequent agitation  in   political  life, 298;   votes  the  constitution  of   1837, 300;   legislative  regulations  by   the Constitution  of   1837,  300;  position under  the  system  of   dictatorships, 304;  suspended  by   the  government, 306;   convoked  by   Progressists  to draw  up  a  constitution,  307   ;   the Additional  Act  guarantees  a  yearly

Christina  of   Spain,  power  of,   in   the government  under  her  husband,  -j Ferdinand  VII.,  296;   appointed  regent for   her   daughter  Isabella,  296; gains  the  support  of   the  Liberals, 207;  promulgates  the  Statute  of 1834,  297;   is   forced  to  promulgate the   Constitution  of   1812,  300;   is   deserted by   the  army  in   Espartero's revolt  and  flees  to   France,  303;   is recalled  by   Moderates,  304;  marries her   favourite  Munoz,  304;  remains head  of   the   court,  304;  rids  herself of   Narvaez  and  gives  the  ministry to  her  personal  following,  305  ; revolution  of  1854  obliges  her  to flee,   306.

Cobbett,  Radical  agitation  by,   28.

Commons,  House  of,   under  the  new electoral  system  (1832),  43;  principle of   parliamentary  supremacy  set up.   43J  after  the  reform  of   1867, 69;   the   sovereign   power,   69;   "obstruction" in,   77;   persistent  oppo-

Coercion  Act  (Ireland),  72.

Cortes  of   Spain - Continued.

Couza,  see  under  Alexander  I.   of Roumania,  643.

session  and  presentation  of  the budget,  307;  elected  by   universal suffrage  in   1868,  310;   its   composition, 310;   proclaims  Republic  and elects  a  ministry,  313;  convoked  by Federalist  ministry  to  make  a  constitution, 313;   deputies  driven  from their  hall  by   Gen.  Pavia,  314;  votes the  restoration  constitution  (1876), 316;   present  conditions,  317.

Cracow  Republic,  412,  776.

Crete,  insurrection  of,   625,   650;   second insurrection,  628;   chronic  agitation, 635;   organic   statute,  635, footnote.

Crispi,  Sicilian  leader  of   the  Republican party,  aids  Garibaldi,  355; prime  minister  of   Italy,   368;   second ministry,  370  ; his  colonial  policy, 399;  speech  at  unveiling  of   Garibaldi monument,  370,  371.

Crimean  War,  789;   restores  Palmerston  to  power,  64',   effects  in   Russia, 590;   declaration  of,   785.

Croatia,  national  opposition  to   Austrian rule,   410;   revolution  of   1848, 415   ;   Hungarian-Croatian  compromise, 541   ;   Unionist  party,  543  ; Greater  Croatia  agitation,  550 ; Serb  party  of,   551.

Custozza,  Sardinian  army  defeated by   Austrian  army   (1848),  344,  779   ; (1866)   358,   802.

Culturkampf  (Germany),  492,  714.

Czartoriski,  Prince,  597.

Danilo,  Prince  of   Montenegro,  663.

Convention,  623.

Danube,  declared  open,  792. Dardanelles,  opened,  620 ;   Straits

Daru,  181;  French  minister  of   foreign affairs,   184  ;   responsible  for Franco-Prussian  war,  184;  on   Vatican Council,  806.

Days  of   June   (France),  163.

Days  of   March  (Prussia),  442.

Deak,  Hungarian  leader,  reform  program, 409;   address  party,  524  ; Deak  party,  542.

Decazes,  French  prime  minister,  121; policy,  121  ;   deserted  by   King,  121; favours  Free  Masons,  719   ;   rumours of  war  between  France  and  Germany, 822.

Decabrists,  revolt  of,   585,   720.

Defacqz,  246,   720.

Defection,  the,  125.

Delyannis,  Greek  prime  minister, 6   56. Denmark,  gains  Lauenburg,  7   ;   formation of   Scandinavian  States,  554; Church,  555;  composition  and  condition of   the  monarchy,  566 ; Schleswig-Holstein  national  agitation, 568;   wars  of   the   Duchies,  569; 798;   Eider  Danes,  569;   Prussia  and Austria  intervene,  572;   loss  of   the Duchies,  572;   Constitution  of   1866, 573;  "   Peasants'  Friends,'  573  ; constitutional  conflict,  574;   Iceland, 576;   political  evolution  of,   843.

Depretis,  Italian  prime  minister,  365; makes  coalition  of   centres  against other  leaders  of  Left,  368 ;   Pentarchy  to  oppose,  368;   list  of   successive ministries,  368;   death,  368. Derby,  English  prime  minister,  leader of   Protectionist  party,  63;   third ministry,  65;   reform  act  of  1867, 66;   retires,  70;  attitude  in   Italian war,  794.

Destruction,  new  means  of,   673.

Diebitsch,  Russian  general.  Polish insurrection,  587;   Turkish  war,  761. Disraeli,  English  prime  minister,  70; second  ministry,  75;  policy  and ideals,  75;  colonial  policy,  76;   supports Ottoman  Empire  in   the   Eastern Question,  76,   824;   at   Congress of   Berlin,  76.

Diet  (Germany),  organ  of  the  Germanic Confederation,  376   ;   Assembly of   1816,   377;   Carlsbad  Decrees, 385   ;   publication  of   debates  forbidden, 386;   decrees  of   1832,   388   ; liberal  majority  accepts  work  of Vorparlament,  391;  restored,  398   ; appoints  "   reactionary  committee," 398   ;   repeals  fundamental  rights, 398;   dissolved  by   Prussia's  victory in   1866,   471.

Doctrinal  Judgment  (Belgium),  231. Dollinger,  on  Infallibility,  705.

Domela-Neiuwenhuis,  Dutch  socialist, 242.

Don  Carlos  VI.,   supported  by   Apostolic party,   295;   refuses  to   oppose Ferdinand,  295;   left  legitimate  heir to   throne  by   Ferdinand's  death  without male  issue,   295;   refuses  to   recognise Isabella  as   Queen,   296   ; his support,  296;   the  Carlist  war,  300; forced  to  sail  for  England,  300;  returns to   Spain  and  sets  up   his   court

Don  Carlos  VI. -  Continued.

Don  Carlos  VII.,  Carlist  candidate  for "   national  kingship  "   in   1868,   311   ; second  Carlist  war,  314;  capital  at Estella,    315   ;     declared    legitimate and  government  at  Navarre,  302; his   poor  generalship,  302;   his  supporters divide,   302;   flees   to   France, 303-

King  by   the   Pope,   315. Dresden  Conference,  398,   783. Dualism,  Austro-Hungarian,  406. Duchies,  war  of,   798.      See   also   under

Dulcigno,  demonstration  of   European fleets  before,  664.

Prussia,  466,   and  Denmark,  569. Duclerc,  French  prime  minister,  210. Dufour,  Swiss  general,  268.

Dupanloup,    on    the    Syllabus,    703, footnote;  opposes  lay   schools,  708. Dupuy,  French  prime  minister,  220. Diippel,  blockade  of,   572,  798.

Dufaure,  French  prime  minister,  205; second  ministry  defeated,  208.

Dynamite,  use  of,   674.

Eastern  Question,  the  Allies  arrayed against  France  on  the,  144,  389 ; Europe  hopes,  by   making  Ottoman Empire  a  modern  state,  to  settle, 625;   settlement  of,   640;   comes  before Allies,   748,   758;   Congress  of Verona,  758;  intervention  of  Europe, 760;   Palmerston's  policy,   770; Disraeli's  policy,  76;   causes  rupture between  France  and  England, 773;   Nicholas  wishes  to  settle,  784; end  of   European  concert,  785;   Crimean war,  789;   Congress  and Peace  of  Paris,  792   ;   reopened  by Herzegovina  revolution,  823;   Russian influence,  823;   Eastern  question divides  Europe,  827;   reopened by   Roumelian  revolution,  829.

(France),  167 ;   of   1842   (Belgium), 245.

Economic  Council  (Prussia),  500. Economic  Life,   transformation  in,   681. Education  Act.  of  1870  (England), 72;   of   1833   (France),  151;  of   1850

Egyptian  conflict  (Mehemet  Ali),   622, 773-

Eider  Danes,  569. Emancipation  of   Serfs  (Russia),  591. Ems  Interview,  809.

Engels,  socialistic  theorist,  49;  agitation, 724;   Manifesto   of   Communist Party,  724.

England,  settlements  of  1815,  6,   8; condition  in  1814,  12;  system  of government  under  George  III.,  12; unreformed  electoral  system,  17; Church,  19;  social  conditions,  20; Corn  Laws,  22;  reform  movement. 25;  old  regime,  25;   Radical  agitation in   1816,   27;   Luddite  Riots,   28; Spafield,  29;  "Gag  Laws,"  31; partial  reforms,  31;   holds  aloof from  the   Holy   Alliance,  31;   Catholic emancipation,  33;  electoral  reform of   1832,   35;   new  conditions  of   political life,   41;   Peel   formulates  principle of   parliamentary  supremacy,  43 ; parliamentary  system,  43;  series  of ministries,  44,   footnote;  Liberal  administrative reforms  and   their   results, 44-49;   industrial  conditions and  labour  agitation  of   the  trades unions,  49,   50;  government  prosecutes the   unions,  50;   Chartist  agitation, Workingmen's  Parliament, Lovett  and  O'Connor,  51-55;  Irish agitation,  O'Connell  and  the  Irish party,  55-58;  free-trade  agitation, Anti-Corn-Law  League,  Cobden, Bright,  and  Villiers,  58;   repeal  of Corn  Laws,  59;   industrial  reforms, Ashley,  Dennison,  and  Villiers,  60; Factory  Act  of  1833,  Labour  in Mines  Act,  Factory  Act  of   1844, Act  of   1878,   60,   61;   Irish  Crisis,   61; Maynooth  Grant,  62;  period  of   inaction and   democratic  evolution, 63;   Conservative  division,  Peelites  and  protectionists  (Bentinck, Derby,  Disraeli),  63;   Ecclesiastical Titles  bill,   63,   footnote;  free  trade established,  Navigation  Act  repealed, treaty   of   commerce  concluded with   France,  63;   importance of  foreign  policy,  64;  period  of material  prosperity,  64;   improved industrial  conditions,  64;   federation of   trade  unions,  64,   65;   Adullamites,  65;   electoral  reform  of   '67, 65;   effect  of   the   reform  on  political conditions,  69;   Gladstone's  reforms (disestablishment   of   Anglican Church  in   Ireland,  Irish  Land Act  of   1870,   Coercion  Act,   Education Act  of   1870,   abolition  of   army  purchase, secret   ballot),   7O~73;   tradeunion  legislation,  73;   Disraeli's policy,   foreign,   colonial,   and   domestic, 75,   76;   Irish   Home   Rule   party formed,  76;  "obstruction,"  77; sults tion,

England - Continued.

Irish  "Land  League,"  and  the three  F's,  78;   Second  Irish  Land Act,  80;   Kilmainham  Treaty,  81; Invincibles  assassinate  secretary for  Ireland,  81;   use  of   dynamite explosions  by   Irish  revolutionists 82;   electoral  reform  (1885),   $2;   Salisbury's first   ministry,  84;   "three acres  and  a  cow,"  85;   Gladstone's third  ministry,  and  the  Irish  question, 85;   "   Liberal  Unionists,"  85; projected  system  of  Irish  home rule,  85,   86;   Ulster's  petition  against home  rule,  86;   party  lines  shattered at   elections  of   1886,   86;   Salisbury's second  ministry  supported by   the  coalition,  86;   Irish  policy and  Land  Purchase  Act,  87,   88;   Parliamentary opposition   to   Salisbury's Irish  policy,  88;   reform  of   county administration,  88;   composition  of the  county  council,  89;   Parnell's death,  89;   break-up  of   Irish  party, 89;   formation  of   Socialist  party, 90;   Gladstone's  fourth  ministry,  93; reform  program,  93;  Rosebery succeeds,  93;   legislative  reform  of 1894   and  its   effects,  94;   progressive inheritance  tax,  95 ; "   mend  or  end   " the  Lords,  95;   Unionists  again  in power  under  Salisbury,  96;   Salisbury's policy,   97;   political  evolution in   igth   century,  97;   growth  of democracy,  99;  English  attitude in   Carlist  War,  302;  as  to   Spanish marriages,  304;  Portuguese  affairs, 319-322;  Polish  insurrection,  600; Egyptian  Conflict,  623,  773;  influence- in  Ottoman  Empire,  635; in   Greek  politics,  654;   fleet  sent  to blockade  the  Piraeus,  655,  761; refuses  to  enter  Holy   Alliance,  750; policy  under  Canning,  759;   Eastern Question,  760;   Anglo-Russian  protocol, 760;   triumph   of   Whigs,   762   ; ministers  control  policy,  765   ; Palmerston  makes  England  rival of   Russia,  765;   attitude  on  Polish Question,  768   ;   intervention  in Spain  and  Portugal,  769;  Quadruple Alliance,  770  ;   rupture  of alliance  with  France,  771;   State  of Good  Feeling,  775;  England  isolated, 777;   her   course  in   Italian affairs,  777;  refugees  in,   781;   recognition of   French  Empire  by,   783; Nicholas  tries  to  settle  Eastern

England - Continued.

Question  with,  784;  lleet  enters straits,  785;   end  of   European  Concert, 785;   military   impotence,  788; Crimean  War,  789;  Polish  affairs, 797;   isolation  of,   822;   Berlin  Congress, 826   ;   Gladstone  changes Eastern  policy  of,   828;   mutual  concessions with   Germany,  830;   policy on   Armenian  massacres,  831;   political evolution  of,   842.

EStvos,  Hungarian  nationalist,  524. Epirus,  Greek  insurrection,  619,   650;

second  insurrection,  629;   action  of Congress  of  Berlin  regarding,  634. Erfurt  Parliament,  397,  782.

Espartero,  Spanish  Liberal  (Progressist) general,   concludes  peace to  end  Carlist  war,  303;  created Duke  of   Vittoria  and  becomes  military dictator  of   Spain,   30^;  supports Progressist  revolt  against  new municipal  law,  303;  has  himself named  regent  and  governs  Spain for   three  years,  303;   is   defeated  by a   coalition  of   all   parties   and   forced to   leave  Spain,   303;   becomes  again leader  of  the  Progressists,  and joins  the  revolution  of  1854,  306; governs,  together  with  O'Donnell,

306. Espinasse.  French  minister  of  interior, 176.

Estrup,  Danish  prime  minister,  574. Eulenberg,  Prussian  minister-president, 509.

European  Balance  of   Power,  doctrine of,   766. European  Concert,  doctrine  of,   766.

Factory  Acts  (England),  Act  of   1833, 60;   Act  of   1844,   6l.

Faik,  German  minister,  493;  "   Falk Laws,"  493;  resigns,  499.

Favre,  Jules,  interview  with  Bismarck at   Ferrieres,  188;   on   FrancoPrussian  War,  816.

Federes,  192.

Fenian  Agitation,  71.

Ferdinand,  Emperor  of  Austria, accession  and  character,  411;   flight from  Vienna,  413;  abdicates,  419.

Ferdinand,  prince  of   Bulgaria,  669.

Ferdinand  VII.,  King  of   Spain,  restored in   1814   by   the  English army,  289;   his   government  and  unsuccessful enterprises,  290;   his   dislike of   the   army,  291;  revolution Jike

## Ferdinand  VII.- Continued.

Ferrieres,  interview  between  Bismarck and   Favre,   189,   816.

of   1820   intimidates  him,   291   ;   his struggles  with  his  Liberal  ministries, 293;   France  restores  the   absolute government,  293   ;   Ferdinand annuls  by   manifesto  all   acts  of   the "constitutional   government,"  294; restores  the  old  regime  as   far  as possible,  294   ;   troubles  in   his   government, 295;   War   of   the   Succession, 295;   promulgates  decree  restoring female   succession,  296. lute sion,

Ferry,  French  prime  minister,  208; second  ministry,  210;  opposes  Radicals, 211  ; defeated  by   Radicals,  212; candidate  for   presidency,  214.

Finland,  582;  system  for  Russification,   612.

Feudal  Party  (Prussia),  445.

Flanders,  Liberals  in   (Beggars),  250; school  law,  252.

Floquet,  French  prime  minister,  214. Fouche,  French  minister,  retains office  under  Restoration,  in  ; arranges  secretly  for  Napoleon's return,  itj,  dismissed  by   Louis XVIII.,  117.

France,  invaded  by   armies  uf   Allies, 4;   Bourbon  restoration,  103;   Charter, 106;   conditions  of   political  life in   1814,  108;   Hundred  Days  and Second  Restoration,  in;  results of  Hundred  Days,  113,  222;  new division  of  parties,  114;  Ultras, 115  ;   counter-revolutionary  crisis brought  on  by   Royalists,  Provost Courts,  White  Terror,  115;   Ckambre Introuvable,  116;  conflict  between King  and  Chamber,  116;  constitutional monachy  and  parliamentary government,  117;  beginning  of  a regular  political  life,   119;  policy   of Louis  XVIII.  and  his   ministry,  119; electoral  and  press  laws,  120;  reorganization period,   120;   formation of   a   Catholic  party,  the   Congregation, 120;   Liberals  gain   strength, 121  ;   Duke  de  Berry  assassinated, 121  ;   government  of   the  Right   under Richelieu  and  Villeie,  121;  revolutionary agitations,   Charbonniers and  Free  Masons,  122;  press   law  of 1822,  123  ;   seven-year  period  for chamber,  123;  Chambre  Retrouve'e, 123;  work  of  restoration  under Charles  X.,   124;  th"  'Defection,"

France - Continued.

125;  unauthorized  orders,  126;   opposition to   King,  127;  origin  of Orleanist  party,  127;  open  conflict between  Chamber  and  King,  128; Charles  determines  on  a  coup   d'etat, 129;  the   four  ordinances  of   July 26,   129;  conditions  favouring  outbreaks, 128;   July   revolution,  130; executive  committee  organized,  130; Louis  Philippe  named  LieutenantGeneral  of   kingdom,  131;  enthusiasm over  revolution  and  tricolour flag,   132;   sovereignty   of   the   people, pie,   132;   "   July   Monarchy,"   133;   political power   centres  in   the   Chamber, 133;   political   character  of   the national  guard,  133;  democratic manifestations,  134;  party  struggle in   the   government,  134;  party  of action,  party  of  resistance,  134; irreligious  character  of  the  July Monarchy,  135;  policy  of   Laffitte's ministry,  135;  commercial  crisis, 135;   National  Association,  136;   the Carlistsand  the  Duchess  of   Berry's insurrection,  136;   Republican  agitation, 136;   "   Rights  of   Man  "   society, 137;  revolt  of   the  Lyons  weavers, 137;   "Mutualists,"  138;   Republican insurrections  in   Paris  andLyons,  138 ; Laws  of   September,  139;   Republican party  suppressed,  139;   CommunistSocialist  party,   formation  and  aims, 141;   long   "resistance"  ministry, 142   ;   three  days'  ministry,  142  ; break  between  Guizot  and  Tb&gt;rs, 142;  general  union  against  tfie king  and  the  court  ministry,  143; Allies  arrayed  against  France  on the  Eastern  Question,  145;  Mole, Soult,  and  Thiers,  143,  145;  reappearance of   Bonapartist  party,  145 Guizot's  ministry,  146;   Pritchard  indemnity, 147;   foreign  and  domestic policy,  146,  147;  agitation  for electoral  reform,  147;   Catholic  and democratic  opposition  parties,  148; attack  on  Jesuits,  149;   Seasons, Communists,  Icarians,  remnants  of Republican  party,  150,  155;   Democratic party   and   its   program, 150;  continued  agitation  for  social reform,  150;  work  of   monarchy  of property  classes,  150  ;   municipal councils,  penal  code,  educational reforms,  increased  deficit,  151; political  conditions  in  184,8.  155

## France - Continued.

reform  agitation  by   banquets,  155; revolution  of   1848,   156;   provisional government,  158,   159;   Republic  declared, 159;   socialist  agitation,  159; national  workshops  established, 160;  industrial  reforms  decreed, 160;   business  crisis,  162;   financial measures  adopted  by   provisional government,  162;  Constituent  Assembly elected  by   universal  suffrage, 162;   its   reactionary  policy,   162; dictatorship  of  Cavaignac,  163; Constitution  of,   1848, 164;   election  of Louis  Napoleon  as  president,  165; his   discord  with  the  Chamber,  165; the  Mountain,  166;  Republican party  crushed,  166;   Roman  Expedition, 166;   electoral  law   of   1850,   167; education  bill  of   1850,  167;   questions which   occupied  the   year  1851, 168;   the  coup   d'etat,  170;  organization of   the   government,  171 ;   Empire restored,  172;  suspension  of   political life,   173;   autocratic  regime,  173; "the  Five,"  176;  events  of  the period,  176;  Orsini  Conspiracy, 176;   Napoleon's  foreign  policy,  176; Italian  war,  177,  793;  revival  of political  life,   177;   "third  party," 178;  Catholic  party  opposes  the government,  178   ;   Mexican  campaign, 177,   179;   failure  of   Napoleon's foreign   policy,   179;   liberal concessions,  179;  Arcadiens,  180; senatorial  decree  of   Sept.,   1869,   181 ; Irredentists  (Radicals,  Socialists, Mutualists,  and  Blanquists),  182; Belleville  program,  182,  183;   Republican agitation,  183;   constitution modified  by   plebiscite,  184   ; Prussian  war,  184   ;   fall  of  the Empire,  187;   Government  of  National Defence,  187,   816;   Commune of   Paris,  188;   election  of   National Asssembly,  189;   election  of   Thiers, 190  ;   Compact  of  Bordeaux,  190  ; government  of   the  Commune,  191  ; F/de're's  and  Communards,  192  ;   decentralization, departmental  committee, 195;   national  guard   abolished, 195;   new  taxes,  195;   rupture in  the  government,  197  ;   Thiers resigns,  197;  MacMahon  elected, 190;   "Moral  Order"  government, 190   ;   program  of   Right,  199   ;   Law of  Septennate,  200;  Lois  Constitutionelles,  201  ;   recognition  of   Retion mittee,

France - Continued.

public,  201  ;   provision  for  Senate, 201  ;   Constitution  of  1875,  202  ; struggle  between  MacMahon  and Chamber,  205;  resignation  of   MacMahon and   election  of   Grevy,   207; supremacy  and  changes  of  Republican party,   207;   ministries,  208210;   breach  with  Catholic  clergy, 209;  Republicans  divide  into  Opportunists and   Radicals,  211;   Tonquin,  2ii  ;   reconstitution  of   Conservatives, 212   ;   "   policy  of  Republican concentration,"  "   policy of  conciliation,"  213;  Boulanger crisis,  213;   Wilson  scandal,  214  ; resignation  of   Grevy  and  election of   Carnot,  214;  policy  of   Boulangists   (Revisionist  or   National  party), 214  ;   transformation  of  extreme parties:  Moderates,  Marxists,  and Possibilists,  216;  «'   Rallied,"  218; conciliatory  policy  advised  by   the Pope,  218;   Conservatives  split   up, 217;   Paris  Labour  Exchange  closed, 218;  Panama  scandal,  218;  new division  of   parties,  218  ;   assassination of   Carnot,  219;  election  of Faure,  220;  political  evolution  in nineteenth  century,  221;  use  of   Interpellation, 226,   227,  and  footnote; French  army  sent  to  aid  Belgium, 238;   France  restores  absolutism  in Spain,  293;  sides  with  Christina against  Don  Carlos,  297;  refuses  to aid  against  Carlists,  299;  share  in Carlist  war, 302;   inBismarck's  diplomacy, 467;   in   Polish  insurrection, 600;   protector  of   Catholics  in   Ottoman Empire,  630;   influence  in   Greek politics,  654;   troops  sent  to   blockade the   Piraeus,  655,   761;   evolution of   National  Church,  691;   Gallican party,  691;   policy   of   Allies  toward, 752;  admitted  to  Holy  Alliance, 754;   intervention  in   Italy,   768;   intervention in   Spain  and  Portugal, 769;   Quadruple  Alliance,  770;  rupture of   alliance  with  England,  771; in   Egyptian  conflict,  773;   "State  of Good  Feeling,"  775;  Swiss  affair, 777   ;   recognition  of   Empire,  783  ; fleet  enters  Straits,  785   ;   end  of European  concert,  785;   preponderance of,   787;   leads  European  policy, 789;   Crimean  War,  789;   alliance  with Sardinia,  793;   Zurich  treaty,  796; annexes  Savoy  and  Nice,  796;   compublican ance

Fr   a   nee- Contin  ned.

mercial  treaty  of   1860,   796;   Polish policy,  797   ;   ^atent  conflict  with Prussia,  804 ;   Napoleon  proposes triple  alliance  805;  plan   of   campaign, 806;   Prussian  war   declared, 807;   London  and  Frankfort  treaties, 817   ;   armed  camps,  819 ;   effect  of war  in,   820;   isolated,  822;   rumours of   war  with  Germany,  822;   Berlin Congress,  826;   understanding  with Russia,  828;  League  of  Patriots, 829;  armed  peace,  831;  political evolution  of,   840;   Church,  liberty of   creed  granted  by   the  Charter, 106  ;   condition  in   1814,  no  ;   revised Charter  establishes  religious equality,  133;   irreligious  character of   the   July   Monarchy,  135;   Catholic opposition  party,  148   ;   Paray-leMonial,  198   ;   policy  of  Catholic party  under  Republic,  198;   breach between  Catholic  clergy  and  Republic, 209.

Francis  II.,   Emperor  of   Austria,  character and   policy,   403.

Francis  Joseph,  Emperor  of  Austria, 419;   recognises  "hereditary abuses,"  518;  grants  constitution of   October,  1860,  420;   deserts  constitutional party,   544.   [See   under Austria  and  Germany  for  events  of his   reign.]

Franco-Prussian  War,  declaration  of, 807;   conduct  of,   813;   effect  in   Europe, 818;   effect   in   France,  820:   in political  evolution  f   f   Europe,  845. [See   also  under  France,  184,   187; under  Germany,  482.]

Frankfort,  Conference,  397;  Parliament, 391,   696;   Treaty   of,   818.

Frederick  VI.,   King   of   Denmark,  566; agitation  in  Schleswig  -   Holstein against,  567.

Frederick  III.,   Emperor  of   Germany, 502;   beginning  of   movement  against Bismarck,  503;  diary,  503;   death, 503-

Frederick  VII.,  King  of  Denmark, 567;   course  in   question  of   duchies, 569;   death,  571.

Frederick  William  IV.,  King  of Prussia,  opposes  idea  of   constitu-

Frederick  William  III.,  King  of Prussia,  accepts  principle  of   representation, 434;   leaves  constitutional party,  435 ;   end   of   reign,   436;   master of   European  diplomacy,  764.

Frederick  William  IV.- Continued.

Free  Masons;  struggle  with  Holy See,   692,   714;   Humanum  Genus  Encyclical, 714;   origin   and   evolution of,   718;   aims   and  organization  of, 718;   favoured  in   France,  719;   forbidden in   Russia  and  Austria,  719; action  in   Europe,  719;   in   France, 122;   in   Belgium,   246;   in   Spain:   connectionwith  revolution  of   1820,   291; the   Blacks,  293;  seven  Masons  executed for   holding   a   meeting,   295;   in Italy,   329;   in   Germany,  384;   in Russia,  582.

don,  434;   beginning  of   reign,   438; reforms,  438;  ideals,  438;  caricatures of,   439;  popular  opposition to,  440;  refuses  constitution,  441; conflict  with  Landtag,  441;  joins revolution  of   '48   and  grants  constitution, 443;   end   of   reign,   450;   position in   European  policy,  764. tures

Freycinet,  French  prime  minister, 208;  second  ministry,  210;  third ministry,  213.

Fuad,  Ottoman  reformer,  628;  death, 630.

Fundamental  Law  (Netherlands),  230.

"   Gag   Laws  "   (England),  31.

Gagern  (Hesse),  389.

Galicia  (Austrian),  revolution  of   1848, 414;  centre  of   Polish  national  movement, 532.

Gambetta,  speech  at  trial  of   Baudin subscribers,  180;  Belleville  program, 182   ;   escapes  from  Paris in   a   balloon,  187;   minister  of   interior and   war   in   1870,   188;   influence, 188,   189;   election  of   1871,   189; leader  of  Extreme  Left,  109;  two famous  phrases,  207;  upbraided  for opportunism,  208,   210;   forms  "the great  ministry,"  210;  resigns,  210; death,  210.

Garay,  Spanish  Minister;  attempts financial  reform,  290,  751.

Garibaldi,  general  under  Roman  Republic, 345;   expedition  to   Sicily, 354;  attacks  States  of   the  Church, 354;   "dictator  of   the  two  Sicilies," 355;  Aspromonte,  357;  Mentana, 358;  unveiling  of  monument  to,

Crastein  Convention,  469,   799.

370^71Seorge  I.,   King   of   Greece,  655. Seorge  IV.,  becomes  King  of  England, 31;   character  and   influence,

George  IV. - Continued.

Germanist  Congress,  390.

31;   opposes  Catholic  Emancipation, 33,   34;   death,  35.

Germany,  condition  in   1814,  374;   formation of   Germanic  Confederation, 375;   Federal  Act,  376;   Diet,  376; individual  governments,  377;  constitutionalists and   absolutists,  380; university  persecution,  382;   Wartburg  festival,  384;  Carlsbad  Decrees, 385 ;   constitutional  opposition, Manuscript  of   Southern  Germany, 386;  revolutionary  movements  of 1830,   387;   Press  Union,  387;   Hambach  Festival,  387;  Radicals,  388; affair  of   the   seven  professors,  389; national  movement  since  1840,  389; patriotic  manifestation  of   1840,   389; Germanist  Congress,  Deutsche  Zeitung,  United  Landtag,  Offenburg Assembly,  Heppenheim  meeting, 390;  revolution  of  1848.  390;   Vorpar   lament,  391;   Frankfort  Parliament, 391;   election  of   Archduke John  as  Imperial  Administrator, 392;  parties,  392;   Grossdeutsche  and Kleindeutsche  parties,  394;   Empire declared  and  King   of   Prussia  chosen Emperor,  395;  trouble  over  the  election, 395;   Republicans  defend  Constitution, 395;   Republican  outbreaks and  extermination  of  party,  396; Conference  of   Berlin,  396,   397;   Erfurt Parliament,  397;   Prussian Union,  397;  Dresden  Conference, 398;  old  Confederation  re-established, 398;   reactionary  committee, 398;   work  of   restoration, 398;   Diet  directed by   Austria,  398;   national  and liberal  awakening,  464;  agitation for  union,  464;   political  clubs,  465; Wurzburg  Conference,  465;  Congress of   Princes,  465;   reform  plan adopted,  465;   Prussia  refuses,  465; Bismarck's  plan  for  union,  466; duchies'  crisis, 466;   Austro-Prussian War,  470;   Confederation  of   1815   dissolved, 470;   new  union  headed  by Prussia,  471;  treaty  of  Prague, 472;  Prussia's  annexations,  472  ; formation  of  North  German  Confederation, 473;   organization  and government,  474:  transformation  of parties,  476;   National  Liberals,  477; the   socialists, 479;   Bismarck's  modified policy   and   economic  reforms, 480;   Guelph  Fund,  481;   isolation  of

Germany - Continued.

South  Germany,  481;   Customs  Parliament, 481;   Franco-Prussian  War, 482;   foundation  of   Empire,  482;   Constitution of   the   Empire,  483;   parties, 485;   conditions  of   political  life,   488; approximate  strength  of  parties, 490;   importance  of   local  legislation, 490;  growth  of  National  Liberal party,  490;   Culturkampf ,   492;   "   Pulpit Paragraph,"  493;   diplomatic  relations with   Pope   broken  off,   493; May   or   Falk  Laws,  493;   Count  von Arnim  agitation,  496;   Bleichroeder Era, 496;   struggle  against  socialists, 496;   Bismarck's  social  and  economic policy,498;  "socialistsof  the  chair," 498;   new  tariff  law,   499;  end   of   Culturkampf, 500;   National  Liberals divide,  500;   Army   Law,  502;   Cartel, 502;   Frederick  III.  and  beginning of   movement  against  Bismarck,  503 ; William  II. and  Christian  Socialism, 503;  rupture  between  Emperor  and Bismarck,  505;  Bismarck  resigns, 505;   New  Course,  506;  change  in commercial  and  foreign  policy,  506; Bismarck's  opposition  to  Caprivi, 508;   Farmers'  League,  508;   elections of   1893,  509;   Hohenlohe  succeeds Caprivi,  509;  Anti-Semites,  510; Alsace-Lorraine,  510;  political  development in   I9th   century,  514; influence  in   Ottoman  Empire,  635; evolution  of   national  church,  692; formation  of   socialist  program,  731; restoration  after  revolution  of   '48, 781;   predominance  and  peaceful  policy, 820;   alliance  of   three  Emperors, 821;   rumours  of   war  with  France, 822;   Berlin  Congress,  826;  formation of   Triple  Alliance,  827;   Skiernevice  interview,  828  ;  attitude toward  Bulgaria,  829;   mutual  concessions with   England,  830;   armed peace,  831;  political  evolution,

842. Gioberti,  Italian  theologian,  336,   694. Gladstone,  English  prime  minister, Peelite,  joins   Liberals,  63;   with  Russell tries   to   lower  franchise,  65;   conversion to   Radicalism,  70;   first  ministry, 71;   his   reforms:  disestablishment of   Anglican  Church  in   Ireland, Irish  Land  Act  of  1870,  Coercion Act,   Education  Act  of   1870,  abolition of   army  purchase,  secret  ballot, 70-73;  trade-union  legislation,  73;

Gladstone - Continued.

second  ministry,  opposition  to   Irish party,  electoral  reform,  79;   foreign policy,  79;   second  Irish  Land  Act, 80;   Kilmainham  Treaty,  81;   electoral reform,   1885,   82;   becomes  unpopular on   foreign   policy   and   retires, 84!   program  at  elections  of 1885,   84;   accepts  home-rule  policy, 85;   third  ministry,  85;   division  of his   party,  85;   fourth  ministry  and program,  93,  94;  new  home-rule bill,   95;   retires  in   favour  of   Lord Rosebery,  93;  attitude  in   Turkish affairs,  632,   828. tires,

Gramont,  Duke  of,   French  minister, 184,   807;   brings   on  war  with  Prussia, 809.

Goblet,  French  prime  minister,  213. Gortschakoff,  Russian  minister,  governor of   Poland,  597;  poses  as  peacemaker between  France  and  Germany, 823;   formation  of  Triple Alliance,  827.

Greece,  insurrection,  620;  independence recognised,  620;   at   Congress of  Berlin,  634;  conditions  before 1820,  648;  commercial  prosperity, 648;   national  renascence,  649;   beginning of   independence,  649;   Pallicares  and  Armatoles,  650;   insurrection, 650;   Mussulman  invasion,  651; constitution  of   Troezen,  652;   European fleets   arrive,   652;   London  Con" ference,  652;   absolutist  system  in, 652;   Otto  of   Bavaria  chosen  king, 652;   conditions  after  independence, 653;   politics,  654;   military  revolt, 654;   constitution  of   1844,654;  political conditions  under  constitutional system,  654;   Don  Pacifico,  655;   English fleet   and   French  troops  sent  to blockade  the  Piraeus,  655;   effect  of Crimean  War  on  Greek  politics, 655;   division  of   parties,  655;   Ionian Isles  annexed,  655;   George  I.   becomes king,   655;   constitution  of 1860,   655;   political  parties  and  their leaders,  656;   Tricoupis  and  Delyannis  ministries,  656;  financial disorder,  656;  general  prosperity, 656.

Gregory  XVI.,  Pope  of   Rome,  condemns Belgian   constitution,  248; revolution  of   1831,   333;  reform  projects, 334;   his   government,  335;  encourages movement  for  national unity,  337-

Grey,   English  primeminister,  favours the   electoral  reform,  35;   his   ministrY»   35.   3°;   ministry  divides  and  is reconstructed  under  Melbourne,  43; reforms  poor-laws,  45.

Grevy,   president  of   French  Republic, loses   presidency  of   National  Assembly, 197;   elected  president  of   Republic, 207;   resigns   by   reason  of Wilson  scandal,  214.

Grtitli  Union,  283.

Guelph  Fund,  481.

Guizot,  French  prime  minister,  press law  of   1819,   120;  unites  with  Republicans against   Charles'  government, 127;   proclaims  sovereignty of   the   people,  132;  party  of   resistance, 134;   breaks  with   Thiers,  142; his  theory,  142;   his  ministry,  145; "   Satisfaits,"  147;   Pritchard  indemnity, 147;   agitation  for   electoral  reform, 147;   political  conditions  in 1848,  155;   denounced  by   national guard,  156;   dismissed  from  office, 157;   "   State  of   Good  Feeling,"  775; Swiss  affair,  777.

Haller,  L.   von,  380,   434;   "   anion  of throne  and  altar,"  689. Hambach  Festival,  387.

Hanover,  government  under  Germanic Confederation,  378;   constitution granted,   387;   affair  of   the seven  professors,  389;   King   rejects election  of   Prussian  King   as   Emperor, 395;   Prussian  alliance,  396; Zollverein,  454;  joins  Austria against  Prussia,  471;  annexed  to Prussia,  472;  opposition,  480; Guelph  Fund,  481.

Hardenberg,  Prussian  prime  minister, 425.

Heine,  382,   387;  opposes  Frederick William  IV.,   440.

Heligoland,  ceded  to  Germany  by England,  830.

Herzegovina,  revolt  of   Christians  in, 628;  revolt  against  corvee,  630; war,  631;   Europe  demands  reforms in,   631:   action  by   Congress  of   Berlin, 634.

Heppenheim  Meeting,  390.

Herzen,  repression  of   Polish  national movement,  600.

Hesse-Cassel,  constitution  of  1831, 387;   Zollverein,  454;  conflict  over constitution  of  1831,  464;  join*

Hess,  German  Socialist,  724.

Hesse-Cassel - Continued.

Austria   against    Prussia,   471;  annexed to   Prussia,  472.

Hesse-Darmstadt,  constitution  under Germanic  Confederation,  379;  secret society   in   Giessen  formulates a   constitution,  384;   Zollverein,453; joins   Austria  against  Prussia,  471. Hidalgo,  313.

Hohenlohe,  Prussian  prime  minister, 459;  Chancellor  of  Empire,  509; rumours  of  war  between  France and  Germany,  822.

Hogendorp,  230.

Hohenwart,  Austrian  prime  minister, 537-

Home  Rule  (Ireland)  :   formation  of Home  Rule  party,  76-78;  party principles,  77;   uses  "obstruction," 77;   demands  radical  reform,  79; "   boycott,"  79;   Kilmainham  Treaty, 81;   Gladstone  converted  to,   85;   the projected  system  of,   85,   86;   support of   the  party,  87;   extension  of   the doctrine,  87;   Parnell's  death  fails  to restore  complete  harmony,  89; Irish  party   breaks  up,   89.

Holy  Alliance,  748.

Humanum  Genus  (Encyclical),  714. Hundred  Days,  in;  results  of,   113. Hungarian  Compromise,  526.

Hungarian  War,  419.

Hungary, liberal  and  nationalist  opposition to   Austria,  406;   dualism,  406; constitution,  406;  organization  of society,  407;  government,  408; Reform  Diet,  408;  political  awakening, 409;   Magyar  the  official language,  409;   liberal  reform  program, 409;   revolution  of   1848,   414; demands  for  liberal  reforms  conceded by   Austria,  414;   independent government,  414;  Austria  breaks with  Hungarian  revolutionists,  417; Palatine  resigns,  417;   Kossuth  at head  of,   417;   Viennese  troops  march on,  417;   Hungarian  War,  419;   Republic declared,  419;   absolutist  restoration, 420;   aristocratic  system destroyed,  421;  ree'nforced  Council, 519;   rejects  constitution,  521; not   included  in   constitution  of   '61, 522;  national  resistance,  523;  address and   decision  parties,   523;   demands, 524;   dualism  restored,  525; negotiations,  525;   Hungarian  Compromise, 526;   Translfitkania,  526; government  under  the  Union,  527;

Hungary - Continued.

receives  Constitution  of   1848   again, 528;   parties  and  politics,  540;   Hungarian-Croatian compromise,  541; Bosnia  Crisis,  544;  political  struggles since  1878,   549;  nationalist agitations,  550;  Omladina,  551; Roumans,  Slovacs,  and  Serbs  form alliance  for  local  autonomy,  552; political  evolution  in   igth   century, 552;  restoration  after  revolution  of '48,   781;   attitude  in   Franco- Prussian War,   813.

Huskisson,  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer, 32;   modifies  economic system,  32. Hydra,  650.

Ibrahim,  leads  Egyptian  army  to  aid Sultan,  620,   641,   760.

Iceland,  576.

Icarians,  150.

Ignatieff,  Russian  general,  councillor under  Alexander  III.,   608.

Industrial  Legislation,  in  England: agitation  for  improved  conditions of  labour,  Kingsley,  Dennison, Ashley,  60;  Factory  Act  of  1833, 60;  minor  reforms,  60;   Labour  in Mines  Act,  60;   Factory  Act  of   1844, 60;   industrial  code  consolidated  in the  Act  of  1878,  61;   trade-union legislation,  73;   Act  of   1871,   74;   tenhour  law  for  women  and  children 1878,  92.  In  France:  reforms granted  by   the  provisional  government of   1848,  160.

Inkermann,  battle  of,   791.

Initiative  and  Referendum  (Switzerland), 271-277.

International  Society,  479,  727.

International  Peace  League,  832.

Interpellation,  226,   227,  and  footnote. Intervention,  principle  officially  re- cognised, 756;   signification  in   Eu-

ance to   maintain  doctrine  of,   771.

ropean policy,   765;   absolutist  alli-

Ionian  Isles,  ceded  to  England.  8; creation  of   Hellenic  centre  in,   649; Republic  of   the  Seven  Isles,  649; ceded  to   Greece,  655.

Ireland,  condition  in   1814,  23;   Catholic Emancipation,  33;   Catholic  Association, 34;   repeal   agitation,  55; O'Connell  and  the  Irish  party,  55; Irish  agitation,  55-58;  church  revenues, 56;   Irish  demands,  57,   58; the  year  1843,  Tara  and  Clontarf,

Ireland - Continued.

58;   famine  of   '45,   59;   Irish  crisis, 61,   62;   Young  Ireland,  62;   Maynooth  Grant,  62;   famine  of  '46, 62;   end  of   political  agitation,  63; Fenians  revive  political  activity, 71;   disestablishment  of  Anglican Church,  71;   Irish  Land  Act  of   1870, 72;   Coercion  Act,  72;   formation and  aim  of   Irish  Home  Rule  party, 76-79,  "obstruction,"  77;  "Land League"  and  the  three  F's,  78; Gladstone's  treatment  of,   79;   Second Irish  Land  Act,   Land  Court, 80;  Kilmainham  Treaty,  81;  the Invincibles,  81;  assassination  of secretaries,  81;   use  of   dynamite  by Irish  revolutionists,  82;   O'Donovan Rossa,  82;  policy  of  Gladstone's third  ministry,  85;   Orangemen,  86; Ulster's  petition  against  Home Rule,  86;   work  accomplished  by Land  Court,  87;   the   "   Plan  of   Campaign," 87;   Salisbury's  policy,  88; Land  Purchase  Act,   88;   division  in Nationalist  party,  89;  elective county  councils  granted  by   Salisbury, 88;   Liberal  Catholic  party, 693.

Church  Surplus,  72,   footnote. Irish  Land  Acts  (1870),  72,   (1881),   80; Purchase  Act,  88.

Irish  Church,  political  position  in 1814.  23;   Catholic  Emancipation, 33;   Grey   ministry  divides  on  question of   revenues,  43;   O'Connell demands  liberty  and  equality  with other  churches,  55;  revenue  question, 56;   Anglican  Church  disestablished in   Ireland,  71;   Irish

Irish  party,  55. Irredentists,  in   Italy,  367;   agitation placed  in   hands  of   police,  368;   in Roumania,  551;   in   France,  182.

Isabella  of   Spain,   succeeds  her   father, Ferdinand  VII.,  296;   her  mother appointed  regent,  296;   declared  of age   in   1843,   303;  marries  Francis, Duke  of  Cadiz,  304;   breaks  with Progressists  over  Church  property and  threatens  to  abdicate,  307; asks  O'Donnell  to  form  a  ministry, 307;   dismisses  O'Donnell  and forms  the  Narvaez  ministry  of Moderates,  307;  recalls  O'Donnell, 308;  restores  Moderates  and  Narvaez, 308;   gains   support  of   absolutists, 308;   revives  Catholic  abso-

Isabella  of   Spain-Continued.

lutism  and  government  by   the camarilla,  308;   her   favourites,  308; receives  the  golden  rose  from  the Pope,  309;   deserted  in   revolution of   1868  and  flees  to  France,  310; abdicates  in   favour  of  her  son,' Alphonso,  312.

Italian  Church,  regulations  after  restoration, 327;   Siccardi  laws,   348; the  Roman  Question,  356;  entanglement of   Church  affairs  after formation  of  kingdom  of  Italy, 360;   Church  property  in   Rome  secularized, 362;   Criroi's  p penal  code,

368. Italian  War,  793.  See  also  under France,  177,  and  under  Italy,   351. Italy,  parcelled  out  in  1815,  10  ; political  condition  in   1815,   and  the restoration,  326;   political  condition after  1815,329;  the  secret  societies, Carbonari,  Free  Masons,  Calderari, Sanfedists,  329:  the  Naples  rebellion, 330;   the   Sardinian  rebellion, 331;   Victor  Emmanuel  abdicates  in favour  of   Charles  Felix,  332;  succession of   Carignano  as  Charles Albert,  332;  revolution  of  1831, 333;  Mazzini  and  the  Republican party,  335;   Young  Italy,  335,  720; the  Risorgimento,  336,   694;   revolutions of   1848,   339;   internal  discords, 341;   reaction,  344;   French expedition  against  Roman  Republic, 345;   Sardinia  after  the  revolution, 347;   Victor  Emmanuel  and the  Constitutional  Statute,  347: Siccardi  laws,  348;   final  division  of parties,  348;   Cavour's  policy,  349; the   National  Union,  350;  agreement of   Plombieres,  351;  formation  of the  kingdom  of   Italy,  war  against Austria,  351;  Garibaldi's  expedition into   Sicily,   and   the   States  of the   Church,  354;  the  Roman  Question, 355,   796;   Garibaldi  defeated at   Aspromonte,357;  SeptemberConvention,  357;  formation  of   parties and  internal  difficulties,  359;  organization of   the  administration, 359;  financial  measures,  360;   Consorteria,  361;   Sella's  financial  reforms, grist   tax   re-established,  361; Rome  made  capital  of  the  kingdom, 362;   strained  relations  with France,  362;  appointment  of bishops,  363;  universal  military 55

I tal   y  -   Continued.

service  adopted,  363;  Left  in power,  363;  qualifications  for  voting, 364;   Depretis  ministry,  365; electoral  law  of   '82,   365;   joins   the Triple  Alliance,  366,   367;   later  parties, 366;   Irredentists,  367;   Barsanti clubs,  367;  Oberdank,  367;  effect of  French  seizure  of  Tunis,  367; Crispi's  government,  368;  new penal  code,  368;  financial  crisis, 369;   colonial  ambitions  and  policy, 369;   government  of   the  Right,  370;   I restoration  of   the  Left  and  Roman  { bank  scandal,  370;   Crispi's  second ministry,  370;  present  political conditions,  371,  372;   Sicilian  bread  j riots,  and  the  Socialists,  371;   Republican party,   371;   Crispi   retires, 372;  Rudini  ministry,  372;  Bismarck's diplomacy,  467;   separation of   Church  and  State,  707;   Austrian and  French  intervention,  769; Italian  affair,  777;  restoration  after revolution  of   '48,   780;   leads  European policy,   789;   alliance  with Prussia,  800;  Napoleon  proposes triple  alliance,  805;  in  FrancoPrussian  War,  813;  takes  Rome, 815;   makes  overtures  to   Germany, 822;  at   Berlin  Congress,  826;   formation of   Triple   Alliance,  827; policy  since  1870,  828;  political evolution,  843.

Jahn,383;  arrested, 435;  pardoned,438. Janissaries,  616,   mutiny  of,   621.

Jellachich,  appointed  Ban  of   Croatia, 415;  manifesto  of  Innsbruck,  415; civil  war   in   Hungary,  417;  appointed king's  lieutenant  in   Hungary,  417. Jesuits,  restored  by   Papal  Bull  in 1814,  689.  In   France:  condemned by   Montlosier,  149  ;   attacked  by Liberals,  149;  expelled,  691.  In Switzerland:  lead  Democratic  Catholic movement,  266,   695;   expelled, 268.  In   Germany:  expelled,  493.

John,  Archduke,  Austrian  prime minister,  414;  elected  Imperial  Administrator, 392.

Jordan  (Hesse),  388.

Josephism,  406;   fall  of,   422.   See   also under  Church  and  Catholic  Parties, 687,   697.

July   Monarchy,  133;  recognised,  766. July  Revolution  (France),  influence on  reform  in   England,  35;   outbreak

July   Revolution - Continued.

of,   130;   influence    in   Belgium,  233; influence  in   Switzerland,  262. Junta,  institution  of,   291.

Kalisch  Interview,  771.

Kara-Georges,  Servian  revolutionist, 657;   assassinated,  658.

Karakosof,  606.

Katkoff,  repression  of   Polish  national movement,  600;  leader  of   autocratic party,  605;   heads  nationalist  party, 608   ;   Councillor  under  Alexander III.,   608.

Kiel,  Peace  of,   554.

Khereddin,  Grand  Vizier  of   Ottoman Empire,  634.

Kilmainham  Treaty,  81.

Kosciusko,  598.

Kossuth,  leader  of   Hungarian  Opposition, 409   ;   head  of  Hungarian Government,  417;  President  of  Republic, 419;   flees   to   Turkey,  419; agitation  in   honour  of,   550;   Napoleon communicates  with,  796.

Kotzebue,  assassinated,  385,   754. Krlidener,  Frau  von,  748;  regarded by   Metternich  as   dangerous,  752. Kussnach,  memorial  of,   263,

Labour  in   Mines  Act  (England),  61.

Lafayette,  French  Liberal  leader, 122  ;   makes  a  triumphal  tour through  southern  France,  127  ; given  military  control  of   July   Revolution, 130;   given   command  of national  guard,  134;  party  of   action, 134.

Laffitte,  French  prime  minister,  organization of   executive  committee after  July   Revolution,  130;   brings Louis  Philippe  to   Paris,  131;  party of   action,  134;  policy  of   his  ministry, 135.

Lambruschini,  Genoese  absolutist, Secretary  of  State  under  Gregory XVI.,  335;  rejected  as  candidate for   the   Papacy,  337.

Lamego,  Charter  of,  restored  by

Lamennais,  Abb6,  236,   693.

John   VI.   of   Portugal  in   1823,   320.

Land  League  (Ireland),  78.

Landrath  (Prussia),  449.

Land  Purchase  Act,  88.

Lassalle,  German  Socialist,  479,  727; part   in   founding  Socialist  party,

Latour,  Austrian  minister  of   war,  418.

731-

Lavroff,  Russian  Socialist,  606.

Lauenburg,  ceded  to  Denmark  by Prussia,  7   ;   annexed  by   Prussia, 572.

Laybach,  Congress  of,   757.

Ledru-Ro-llin,  French  Radical  leader, 148,  155 ;   in   the  provisional  government of   the   Republic,  159   ; Socialist  leader,  163   ;   candidate  for presidency,  165   ;   flees  to   London, 166.

Leo  XII.,  Pope  of   Rome,  his  policy, 333   ;   struggle  against  secret  societies, 692.

Leo  XIII.,  Pope  of   Rome,  negotiations with   Germany,  499;  election of,   710  ;   encyclicals,  711   ;   policy, 714;  struggle  against  Free  Masons, 714   ; interferes  in   domestic  policy, 715   ;     attempts   to   unite  Orthodox Churhes       into      Catholic      unity, 715;  encyclical  for  Catholic  union, 716.

Leopold  of   Coburg,  becomes  King  of Belgium,  235;  takes  Liberal  ministry, 246;   European  policy,   765.

Leopold  of  Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen,  candidate  for  Spanish  throne, 311,   808.

326;  Milan  conspiracy  against Austria,  332  ;   revolution  of   1848, 339;   Lombardo- Venetian  Kingdom unites  with  Sardinia  for   independence, 344;   reconquered  by   Austria, 344;   becomes  part  of   the  kingdom of   Italy,   351.

Liberal  Alliance  (Belgium),  246. Liberal  Unionists  (England),  85. Livret,  labourer's  pass-book,  108. Lois  Constitutionelles  (France),  201. Lombardy,  restored  to  Austria,  6,

London  Conference  (1831),  for  settlement of   Belgium,  237,  767  ;   of Greece,  652;   of   Schleswig-Holstein, 570;  of   Black  Sea  (1871),   817.

London,  Treaty  of,   817.

Louis  XVIII.,  King  of  France,  restored to   throne,  105   ;   publishes liberal  Charter,  105  ;   Hundred Days,  113;   flees  to   Belgium,  113; restored  once  more,  113;  conflict with  the  Chamber,  116;  policy  of his  government,  119;  adheres  to Holy  Alliance,  750;   death,  124.

Louis  Philippe,  Duke  of   Orleans,  127; brought  to  Paris  and  appointed Lieutenant-General  of  kingdom, 131   ;   rides  across  Paris,  131;  pro-

Louis  Philippe - Continued.

claimed  king,  132;  "July  Monarchy," 133   ;   democratic  manifestations, 134;   attacked  and   ridiculed by   the   press,  138;   attempted  assassinations, Fieschi,   139;   parliamentary struggles,  142;  tries  for  personal government,  143;   Mole,   Soult, Thiers,  143-145;  Guizot's  ministry, 145   ;   political  conditions  in   1848, 155;  revolution  of   1848,   156;   recalls Thiers,  157;   Republic  declared,  159; his  parliamentary  policy,  764;   his position  in   Europe,  766;   snubbed by   European  courts,  772.

Louis  Napoleon.     See  Napoleon  III. Louie,  Marquis  of,   Grand  Seignior  of the  Free  Masons,  leader  of   Portuguese Historic  Left,   323.

Lovett,  disciple  of  Owen,  leader  of the   Chartist  agitation,  52.

Lubeck,  Polish  prime  minister,  584. Luddite  Riots,  28.

Luxemburg,  disposal  by   Allies  in 1814,   243;   joins   Belgium  in   revolution of   1830,   243;  constitutions  of '48   and   '56,   244   ;   constitution  of   '68 and  personal  union,  244;  passes  to Duke  of   Nassau,  244  ;   settlement  of relations  with  Belgium  by   London Conference,  767   ;   sale  to   France prevented  by   Germany,  244,   803.

Maassen,  Prussian  financier,  452. Maina,  649;   revolt  in,   652.

Maintenance  of   Treaties,  doctrine  of,

765;   system  broken  up,   789.

Maistre,  J.   de,   on  the   Holy   Alliance,

Malines,  Archbishop  of,   232.

749Manin,  Venetian  Republican,  appointed president  of   provisional government  of  Venetia,  340  ;   converted to   national  unity,   349.

Manteuffel,  Prussian  general,  first Statthalter  of   Alsace-Lorraine,  513. Manuel,  French  Liberal  leader,  122; expelled  from  the  Chamber,  123.

Manuscript  of  Southern  Germany,

Machinery,  influence  of,   672.

386. Mac-Mahon,  President  of   French  Republic, 197;   "Moral  Order"  government and   its   program,  197;   Law of  Septennate,  200;  struggle  with Chamber,  205;  resigns,  207;   in   Italian war,  795;   in   Franco-Prussian war,  814.

Magenta,  battle  of,   795.

Maroto,  Carlist  General-in-Chief, leader  of   the   Marotists,  302;   forces Don  Carlos  to  submit  to   his   despotic tactics,  302.

Mahmoud,  Sultan  of  Ottoman  Empire, 621;   reforms,  621;   death,   623; Eastern  Question,  773.

Maria  Christina,  wife  of  Alphonso XI   I.,   becomes  regent  after  his   death, 318;   her  early   preference  for  Liberals, and   later  dependence  on Conservatives,  318.

Maria,  Queen  of   Portugal,  her  accession, 320;   Miguel,  her   regent,  declares himself  king,   321;  restored, with  the  constitution  of   1826,  321.

Martignac,  French  prime  minister, 125;  returns  to   Decazes*  policy  of conciliation,  125.

Maritime  Law,  regulation  of,   792.

Marx,  socialistic  theorist,  makes  use of   English  industrial  conditions,  49; International,  479;  influence  in Russia,  606;  agitation,  723;   Manifesto of   Communist  Party,  724  ; Paris  manifesto,  730;  contest  with

Bakounine,  730;   Marx  party,  732. May   Laws  (Germany),  493;   (Austria),

540. Maynooth  Grant,  62,

Mecklenburg,  government  of,   under Germanic  Confederation,  378.

Mazzini,  Genoese  Republican,  335  ; Young  Italy   and  Young  Europe,  335, 720;  his  efforts  for  Italian  unity, 3351  composition  of   his   party,  341; head  of   the  Roman  Republic,  343; incites  Orsini  conspiracy,  720.

Mehemet-Ali,  pasha  of   Egypt,  sends aid  to   Sultan,  620;   claims  Syria   as reward,  622;   Egyptian  Conflict,  622, 773;   loses  Syria,   623;   forced  to  accept peace,   623.

Melikoff,  Loris,  608.

Melbourne,  English  prime  minister, reconstructs  Grey  ministry,  43; prosecution  of  the  trade  unions, 50;  attitude  towards  first  Chartist agitation,  53;  treatment  of  Irish difficulties,  56;   resigns,  but   is   reinstated, 57;   defeat,  59.

Mendizabal,  Spanish  Liberal  (Pro'   gressist)  minister  under  Christina, 299  ;   suppresses  religious  houses, 299.

Menschikoff,  mission  to  Turkey, 785.

Mentana,  Garibaldi  defeated  by   troops

Mexican  expedition,  177,  179.

of   France  and  Papal   States,  358. Metz,  blockade  of,   816.

Metternich,  Bourbon  restoration  in France,  103;  opposes  Italian  unity, 328;   formulates  theory  of   intervention in   countries  troubled  by   revolution, 331  ;  opposes  Prince  of Carignano,332;  leader  of   absolutists in   Germanic  Confederation,  382; fights  secret  societies,  384;   liberal movement  of   1830,  388;   character, 4O3.  75o;  theory  of   conservatism, 403;   his   system,  403;  weakening  of his   system,  411;   loses  popularity, 412  ;   resigns,  413  ;   forbids  Free Masons  and  all   other  associations, 719;  on   Holy   Alliance,  750;  rivalry with  Alexander  I.,   750;   his   Eastern policy   abandoned,  760   ;   his   system abandoned,  762   ;   one  of   the  masters of   European  diplomacy  up   to 1848,   764;   in   Swiss  affair,  777.

Miaoulis,  Greek  minister,  655.

Michael,  prince  of   Servia,  658;   driven out,  658 ;   succeeds  Milosh,  659 ; policy,  659;   assassinated,  659.

Miguel,  son  of   John   VI.   of   Portugal, leader  of   Absolutists,  320;   becomes regent  for  his  niece  Maria,  321  ; proclaims  himself  king,   321;   driven from  the  kingdom  in   1834,   321.

Midhat  Pasha,  Grand  Vizier  of   Ottoman Empire,   631;   crushes  Bulgarian insurrection,  631;   fall  of,   633. Milan,  prince  of   Servia,  658.

Milan  II.,   prince   of   Servia,  659   ;   government, 661;   secures  title   of   king. 661.

Milosh  Obrenowitch,  work  of  emancipation, 658 ;  made  hereditary prince  of   Servia,  658;   government, 658;   abdicates,  658;   recalled,  659.

Mirari  Vos  (Encyclical),  693.

Minghetti,  Italian  leader  of  Right, 359;  work  in   organizing  administration, 359;   minister  in   the   Consorteria,  360;   prime   minister,  361; sums  up   his   program,  364.

Missolonghi,  siege   of,   651.

Modena,  given  back  to   Austrian  rule, 326;   the   restoration,  327;  revolution of   1831,   333;   Duke  allies  with  Austria, 339;   revolution  of   1848.   341; restoration,  344;   becomes  part  of the  kingdom  of  Italy,  351  ;   the Italian  war.  352.

Mole,  French  prime  minister,  143  ; dissolves  the  chamber,  144;   left  in minority  and  resigns,  144;  recalled, 157-

Moldavia,  Napoleon  III.  secures autonomy  for,   626;   condition  up   to 1856,  640;   revolution  of   1848,  641; formation  of  state  of  Roumania, 642 ;  recovers  Bessarabia,  646 ; joins   Russia  in   war  of   1877,  642   ; deprived  of   Bessarabia,  646   ;   Ypsilanti's  revolt,  757.

Montlosier,  Gallican  writer,  124.

Moltke,  von,  organizes  Ottoman  army, 621  ;  report  on  Wallachia,  641, footnote  ;   Franco  -   Prussian  war, 814 ;  rumours  of  war  between France  and  Germany,  822.

Montenegro,  supports  Christian  revolt in   Herzegovina,  628  ;   revolt against  corvte,  630;   in   congress  of Berlin,  634;  political  conditions, 663   ;   Danilo  succeeded  by   Nikita, 663;   territorial  increase,  663;   dem onstration  of  Dulcigno,  664;  government, 664.

Montalembert,  leader  of  Catholic party   (France),  166;   education  bill of   1850,   167,   693.

Moravia,  Czech  national  opposition, 410  ;   Pan-Slavism,  410;  revolution of   1848,   414.

Morea,  European  fleets  sent  to,   620,

760;   Hellenic  national  awakening, 649;   government,  649;   revolt,  650. Mountain  (France),  166;  growth  of, 167.

Mourad  V.,   Sultan  of   Ottoman  Empire, 631.

Mouravief,  601.

Mxinchengraetz  Interview,  770. Municipal  Corporations  Act  (England), 47.

Mufioz,  favourite  of  Christina  of Spain,  299  ;   marries  her  and  is created  Duke  of   Rianzares,  304. Mutualists,  138.

Naples,  kingdom  of,   the  restoration in,   329;   military  revolution  of   1820, 330,  755;   Sicilian  massacres,  336, footnote;  revolution  of  1848,  340, Sicilian  war,  342;   becomes  part  of the  kingdom  of  Italy,  351  :   the Camorra,  360.

Napoleon  I.,   effects  of   his  rule,   3; concordat,  688;  final  union  of   the powers  against  him,   3;   his   rejection

Napoleon  I.  - Continued.

Napoleon  III.,   attempts  to  overthrow government  of  Louis  Philippe, Strasburg,  Boulogne,  145;  elected president,  165   ;   discord  with  the Chamber,  165   ;   the  "   Mountain," 166  ;   Roman  expedition,  166  ;   increases personal  power,  168;   questions which   occupied  the   year  1851, 168;   his   coup   d'Aat,  170;  organization of   his   government,  171;   Empire restored,  172;  autocratic  regime,  173; Orsini  conspiracy,  176   ;   his   foreign policy,  176   ;   Italian  war,  177;  tries to  win  over  Liberals  by   reforms, 177   ;   opposed  by   Catholic  party, 178;   Mexican  disaster  and  failure of   foreign  policy,  179;   his   liberal concessions,  179;  senatorial  decree of   Sept.,   1869,   181;   failing  health, 181   ;   slowly  reorganizes  his  government as   Liberal  Empire,  181   ; Prussian  war,  184,  187 ;   fall  of Empire,  187;   deposed,  190;   leagues with  England  and  Sardinia  to  maintain Ottoman  Empire  against  Russia, 626;   as   master  of   foreign   policy, 787,   789   ;   predominance  of,   792   ; Congress  of   Paris  changes  position of,   792;   alliance  with  Cavour,  793; communicates  with  Kossuth,  796   ; Zurich  treaty,  796;   annexes  Savoy and  Nice,  796;   commercial  treaty of   1860,   796;   Roman  Question,  796; action  in   Polish  affairs,  797;   isolated and  loses  predominance,  797;   September Convention,  799;   Biarritz interview,  799;  peace  of  Prague, 802  ;   secret  interview  with  Bismarck, 803;   interview  with  Emperor of   Austria,  804.

of   terms  offered  by   the  Allies,  4; Hundred  Days,  in,  222  ;   ashes brought  back  to   France  by   Thiers, 145,  774,   footnote.

Narvaez,  Spanish  general,  liberal (Moderate),  assumes  control  of   the government,  304;  dismissed  by Christina,  305;   heads  a  coalition  of Progressists  and  Moderates  against the   ministry,  306;   called  by   Isabella to   form  a  ministry  of   Moderates, 307;  recalled,  308;   policy  by   which he   held  the   ministry  until  his   death,

309Nassau,  decrees  of  1832,  388   ;   joins Austria  against  Prussia,  470  ;   annexed to   Prussia,  472.

National  workshops  (France),  theory formulated  by   Louis  Blanc,  141  ; established  by   decree  of   provisional government  of   Republic,  160.

Nautical  Isles,  650;  revolt  of,   650. Navarino,  battle  of,   652,   760.

National  Defence,  government  of   the, 187,   816.

Navarre,  position  in  the  Spanish monarchy,  300;  government,  300; supports  Don  Carlos,  300  ;   first Carlist  army  organized  there  by Zumalacarregui,  301;  seat  of   Carlist government,  302;  second  Carlist war,  314.

Netchajew,  Russian  Terrorist,  606, 730.

Navigation  Act   repealed  (England), 63-

Netherlands,  formation  of  kingdom of   the,   229;   social  conditions  in   1814, 229;  effects  of   French  occupation, 229;  neutrality,  230;  Belgian  opposition, 230;   government  under Fundamental  Law,  230;  Revolution of   1830,   234;   Belgium  becomes  independent of,   234;   London  Conference, 237;   siege   of   Antwerp,  238; Constitution  of  1848,  238;  parties since  1848,  240;  school  question, 241;   Sumatra  revolt,  242;   finance, army,  and  suffrage  questions,  242; prosperity,  243;  position  of   Luxemburg in   the  kingdom,  243.

Nicholas  I.,   Tsar  of   Russia,  585;   puts down  Polish  insurrection,  587;   system, 588;   Crimean  War,   590;   death, 590;  on  condition  of   Turkey,  626; Eastern  policy,  760;  one  of  the masters  of  European  policy,  764; influence,  764;  wishes  to  settle Eastern  Question,  784.

Nice,  annexed  by   France,  796.

Nicholas  II.,   Tsar  of   Russia,  613. Niel,  French  minister  of   war,  180;   in Italian  war,  795.

Nikolsburg,  preliminary  peace  of,   803. North  German  Confederation,  473. Norway,  union  with  Sweden,  7;

formation  of  Scandinavian  States, 554;   Church,  555;   Democratic  party, 559;  government,  560;  prosperity, 561;   Oscar  II. 's   conflicts  with  Storthing on  constitutional  question, 562;   national  conflict,  563.

Nostis  ft   Nobiscum  (Encyclical),  696. Nothomb,  Belgian  prime  minister, 236,   245;   Education  Act   of   1842,   245.

j Novara,  Austrian  army  defeats  Sardinian Liberals  (1821),   332;   Austrian army  defeats  Sardinian  army   (1849;,

344Novosiltzow,  Imperial  Commissioner of   Poland,  584.

## Oberdank,  367.

Obstruction  (England),  77.

O'Connell,  director  -of  the  Catholic Association  (Ireland),  34;  elected  to Parliament,  34;   forces  repeal  of Catholic  disabilities,  34;  organises the  Irish  party,  55;   his  purposes and  policy,  55;   begins  to  agitate  for radical  reform  and  Home  Rule,  57; the  year  1843,  57;   arrested  and  condemned, then   discharged  and  retires, 58.

O'Connor,  Irish  orator,  leader  in   the Workingmen's  Parliament,  Chartist agitation,  53.

Odilon  -   Barrot,  French  minister, leader  of   Dynastic  Left,  146,   148; called  to  ministry,  157.

O'Donnell,  Spanish  Moderate  general, organizes  the  revolution  of 1854  at   Madrid,  306;   governs,  together with   Espartero,  306;   the Liberal  Union,  306;   takes  the  ministry and   restores  the   constitution of   1845,   with  the  Additional  Act, 307;  dismissed  by   Isabella,  307; second  ministry  and  policy,  308. Old  Catholics,  Church  of,   formed,

707. Oldenburg,  government  of,  under Germanic  Confederation,  378;  connection with   Zollverein,  454.

Ollivier,  leader  of   third  party,  rivalry with  Rouher,  178;  relations  with Napoleon  III.,  181;  opposition  of Left,  182;  declares  against  official candidature,  183;   proposes  revision of   constitution,  183;   ministry  defeated in   Prussian  War,  184;   foreign policy,  806;   proposed  disarmament,

Olmtitz  Interview,  humiliation  of Prussia,  783.

Omladina,  551.

Orloff,  Russian  ambassador,  connection with   rumours  of   war  between France  and  Germany,  822.

Orsini  conspiracy,  leads  to   Palmerston's  fall,   64;   attack  on   Napoleon III.,   176;   incited  by   Mazzini,  720; impression  on   Napoleon,  793.

Oscar  I.,   King   of   Sweden,  561. Oscar  II.,    King   of    Sweden,  conflict with  Storthing,  562.

Ottoman  Empire,  conditions  in   1814, 616;  government,  616;  church,  617; society,  617*  allies,  619;   Eastern Question,  619;   agitated  conditions since  1814,   619;   Greek  insurrection crisis,  619;   European  intervention, 620;  Straits  opened,  620;  Mahmoud's  reforms,  621;  army  reform and  mutiny  of   janissaries,  621;   intellectual conditions,  622,   footnote; Egyptian  conflict,  622;  European intervention,  623;   consolidation  of, 623;   Straits  Convention,  623;   AbdulMedjid  grants  constitutional  charter of   1839,   623;   Reschid's  reforms, 624;  "Old  Turks,"  624;  England and  Russia  contend  for  influence over,  624;  struggle  between  Reschid  and  Riza,  624;  reforms  in army,  administration,  and  finance, 625;   Ottoman  Bank,  625;  period  of prosperity  and  peace,  625;  England, Sardinia,  and  Napoleon  III., unite  to  maintain  Empire  against Nicholas,  626;  monks  quarrel  over keys   of   Holy   Places,  626;   Crimean War,  626,   789;   Congress  of   Paris, 626;  autonomy  for  Moldavia  and Wallachia,  626;  reform  edict,  626; religious  liberty  promised,  626;   administrative and   jiviicial   reform's under  Fuad  and  Ali,   628;  revolt  of Cretans  and  Greeks,  628;  reforms prove  fallacious,  629;   Europe  protests, 629;   end   of   French  influence, 630;   destruction  of   European  concert of   protectors,  630;   financial crisis,  630;   rebellion  against  corvte, 630;  Europe  demands  guarantees and   control,  631;   French  and English  consuls  assassinated  in Salonica,  631;  "Young  Turkey," 631;   Midhat-Pasha,  631;   Bulgarian atrocities,  632;  public  opinion  in Europe  turns  against,  632;   Europe determines  to   become  guardian  of, 632;   Conference  of   Constantinople and  Berlin  Memorandum,  632;   Constitution of   1876,   632;   Islamism  the state  religion,  632;   fall   of   MidhatPasha,  632;  Evet  Effedim,  633; Europe  loses  faith  in   promises,  633; Russian  invasion,  633;   dismemberment after   Russo-Turkish  War.  633;

Otto  I.,   King   of   Greece,  652.

87.1

Ottoman  Empire - Continued.

Owen,  English  philanthropist,  founder of   associations  of   workingmen, 49;  the  Great  National  Trades Union,  50,  51;  the  socialistic schools,  721.

Congress  of   Berlin,  634;   personal government  of   Abdul-Hamid,  634; Albanian  revolt,  634;   Panislamism, 635;   English  and  German  influence, 635;  peaceful  period,  635;  French and  Russian  influence,  636;  Armenian massacre,  636;   powers  demand reforms  and   guarantees,  636; Christian  nations  of,   in   1814,   638, peace  of   Adrianople,  761;   refugees, 781;  Nicholas  wishes  to  settle Eastern  Question,  784:  Russia severs  diplomatic  relations  with, 785;   integrity  of,   guaranteed,  792; Peace  of  Paris,  792;  Berlin  Congress, 826.

Pact  of   1815   (Switzerland),  260. Palacky,  410;  Panslavic  Congress,

415. Palikao,  French  prime  minister,  184. Palmerston,  English  prime  minister, leader  of  Liberals,  63;   retires  on Napoleon's  coup   d'tltat,  64;   restored to  power  by   Crimean  War,  64; retires  on  the  Orsini  conspiracy, 64,   third  ministry,  64;   death,  64, 65;   makes  England  rival  of   Russia, 765;  Eastern  Question,  770,  773; work  in  Italy,  777;  recognises French  Republic,  779;  refugees, 781;   end  of   influence,  788.

Parma,  revolution  of   1831,   333;   Duke allied  with  Austria,  339;  abandoned by   Austria,  341;  restoration,  344; Italy,   351;   in   the   Italian  war,  352. Parnell,  takes  leadership  of  Home Rule  party,  77;  party  principles,

Panama  Scandal,  218. Paniza,  Major,  case  of,   669. Panslavic  Congress,  415. Panslavism,  410. Papal  Guarantees,  law  of,   708. Paris,  Conference  of,   643;   Congress of,   626,   791;   formation  of   state  of Roumania,  642 ;   peace  of  (1856), 792;   siege   of,   816;   treaty  of   (1815),   7. Paris,  Count  of,   successor  under Compact  of  Bordeaux,  190,  199; expulsion  of  "pretenders,"  213; joins   in   cry   for   Revision,  217. becomes  part  of  the  kingdom  of

Parnell -   Continued.

77;   "   obstruction,"  77;   tours  through United  States,  78;   denounced  and arrested  by   Gladstone,  81;  Kilmainham  treaty,  81;   violent  agitation, 81;   banquet  and  subscription in   his   honour,  82;   new  policy  of controlling  ministry,  85;   rumours  of agreement  with  Gladstone,  85; compromised  by   scandalous  divorce trial,  89;   party  breaks  up,   89; death,  89.

Paskiewitch,  Viceroy  of   Poland,  587. Pastor  ^Eternus  (Bull),  706,   footnote. Pavia,  Spanish  general,  governor  of Madrid,  314.

Peasants'  Friends  (Denmark),  573. Pedro,  son  of   John   VI.   of   Portugal, resigns  succession  in   favour  of   his daughter  Maria  and  promulgates the   Constitutional  Charter  of   1826, 320;  comes  to   Europe  to  make  war against  Miguel,  321.

Peel,  English  prime  minister,  Home Secretary,  31;  reforms  penal  code, 32;   resigns  with  Wellington  and   is recalled,  34;   leader  of   Conservatives, 42;   on   the   reform  of   '32,   42; two  unsuccessful  attempts  to  carry on  a   minority  ministry,  43,   57;   third ministry,  financial  and  customs  re forms,  57-60;  repeal  of   Corn  Laws, 59;   attempts  to  conciliate  the   Irish, 62;   increases  Maynooth  Grant,  62. Pellico,  Silvio,  imprisoned  for   leader ship   in   the   Milan  conspiracy,  333.

Pereira,     Portuguese     minister,     attempts to  overcome  the  deficit,  323. Pestel,  execution  of,   585.

"   Peterloo,"  massacre,  30.

Pfizer  (Wurtemburg),  389.

Peter's  Pence,  710.

Pi   y   Margall,  Spanish  minister  under the   Republic,  313;   first  President  of the  Republic,  313;   leader  of   social ist   Federalists,  317.

Pie,   Cardinal,  706.

Piedmont,  revolution  of   1848,   341;  attacks the   Austrian  government openly,  350;   in   the   Italian  war,  351: the   Nazione  Armata,  353-

Pius  IX.,  Pope  of   Rome,  condemns Belgian  constitution,  248;  grants liberal  reforms,  Consulta  di   State, 337;  grants  further  reforms  and  the Fundamental  Statute,  340;  Roman Republic,  343;  Roman  Question, 3551  rejects  law   of   guarantees,  362;

Pius  Y£.   -  Continued.

struggle   against   adversaries,  692; election  of,   694;   on  modern  errors, 698;   on   loss   of   temporal  power,  698; conflicts  with  lay   governments,  707. Plevna,  siege   of,   825.

Plombieres,  interview  ot,   351,  793. Pobiedonostsef,     councillor     under Alexander  III.,   608.

Poland,  disposal  of,   at   Congress  of Vienna,  7;   Polish  national  opposition to   Austrian  rulev   410;   Cracow Republic,  412;  revolution  of  1848, 415;   demand  of   national  autonomy, 536;   government  of,   under  Russia, 583;   society,  584;   prosperity,  584; unpopularity  of   system,  584;   insurrection, 586;   abandoned  by   Europe, 586;  under  military  dictatorship, 587;   insurrection  of   1863,   597;   Agronomic Society,   597;   granted  separate ministry,  598;   national  movement crushed,  600;   Rnssification, 6n;  Polish  Question,  768;   Cracow affair,  776;  revival  of  nationalist agitation,  797. rate ment

Polignac,  French  prime  minister,  126; his   vision,  129.

Pomerania,      ceded     to     Prussia     by Sweden,  7, Ponsonby,  773.

Population,  transformation  in,   678.

Portugal,  government  prior  to  1814, 319;  army  overturns  system  established by   the  English,  319;   King John   VI.   returns  from  Brazil  by   invitation of  the  army  and  accepts the   Constitution  of   1822,   320;  party divisions,  320;   John   restores  Charter of   Lamego,  320;  the  Constitutional Charter  of   1826,   320;   the   War of   the  Succession,  321;  Chartists and  Septembrists,  322;   Additional Act  of   1852,   323;  the  deficit,  323; present  political  conditions,  324; Russian  influence,  750;   Canning's policy  in,   759;   intervention  in,   769; Palmerston's  action  in,   777;   Church regulations  under  Constitution  of 1836,   320.

Potocki,  Austrian  prime  minister,

Potter  (Belgium),  234.

537Prague,  treaty  of,   472,   802.

Press,  effects  of    machinery  on,   677.

In   England:  begins  to   be   a  power, 26;   improved  conditions  under   reform of   1832,   41.     In   France:  liberty

Press - Continued.

granted  by   Charter,  106;   condition in   1814,  no;  penal  servitude  decreed for   seditious  writings,  116; law  of   1819,   120;   law  of   1822,  123; prosecutions  under  Charles  X.,   124; Vandal  Bill,  125;   four  ordinances and  protest,  129;  censorship  forbidden by   revised  charter,  133;   Laws of   September,  139;   law  of   1849,   J66; under  Second  Empire,  174;  restrictions abated,   177;   law   of   1868,   179. In   Switzerland:  Concltisum  of   1823, 262;   freedom  under  Constitution  of 1848,269.  In   Spain:  strict  government censorship  under  Constitution of   1845,   304;   special   system   decreed, 306;   aggravated  further  by   Narvaez, 307;   Moderate  ministry  attacks  journalists and   professors,  309;   liberty established  by   revolution  of   1868, 310;  Castelar  restores  system  of warnings  and  suspensions,  314.  In Germany:  Carlsbad  Decrees,  385; decrees  renewed,  386;   Press  Union, 387.  In   Austria:  Metternich  system, 405;   system  weakened,  411. In  Prussia:  lacking  in  1815,  429; censorship  ordered,  435;  censorship relaxed  by   king,  439;  censorship restored,  439;  stifled,  450;  notification system,  463.   In   Russia:  relaxation of   censorship  under  Alexander II.,   590;   liberal  system,  597; return  to  absolutism,  603;   censorship restored,  609;   "knocking  out the  caviar,"  609.   In   Greece:  freedom established,  655. ander

Prim,  Spanish  general,  with  Serrano, heads  the  provisional  government of   1868,  310;  governs  in   the  name of   the   Progressists  until  his   death, 311;  seeks  a   king   for   Spain,   311;   is assassinated,  311.

Pronunciamiento,  institution  of 291.

Princes,  Congress  of,   465. Pritchard  Indemnity,  147.

Proudhon,  150;  new  socialist  revolution, 163,   722;   Anarchy,   735.

Provost  Courts  (France),  115.

Provincial  Estates  (Prussia),  434.

Prussia,  compensation  for   loss  of   Poland, 7,   428;   formation  of   Germanic Confederation,  375;  system  of   government, 378;   absolutism,  380,   382; persecution  of   revolutionists,  388; national  manifestation,  390;   United

Prussia - Continued.

Landtag,  390;   Little  Germany  party, 395;  King  chosen  Emperor,  395; King  refuses,  395;  crushes  the  Republican rising,   396;   alliance  with Saxony  and  Hanover,  396;   plan   of constitution,  397;  Berlin  Conference, 397;   Prussian  Union,  397; yields   to   Austria  and  dissolves  the Union,  397;  reforms,  424;  social  and political  conditions  in  1815,  429; parties  and  political  leaders,  429; absolutist  reforms,  430;  government of   the  kingdom,  430;  social  conditions after   1815,  431  ; financial  organization, 432;   extension  of   Prussian Code,  433;  compulsory  primary  education, 433;   reorganization  of   army, 433;  creation  of   Provincial  Estates, 434;  censorship  of   press,  435;  procedure against   "   demagogues, "435; conditions  up   to  1848,   436;   Church conflicts,  437;  accession  of   Frederick William  III.,   438,   his   reforms,  438; his  ideals,  438;  censorship  court established,  439;  conflict  between King  and  Landtag,  441;   King  concedes periodic   meeting,  442;   Revolution of   '48,   442;   Days   of   March, 442;   Frederick  William  joins   revolutionists and   grants   constitution, with  universal  suffrage,  443;   National Assembly,  444;   Feudal  party, 445;  constitution  of  December  6, 446;   constitution  of   1850,   477;  the reaction,  448;   Landrath,  449;  creation of   House  of   Lords,   449;  name Landtag  adopted,  449;  press  stifled, 450;  court  party,  450;  personal  government restored,  450;   William  I. becomes  Regent,  450,  policy  toward leadership  of   Germany,  451;   Zollverein,  452;  reform  of   army,  455; William  I.   becomes  King,  456;   conftict  between  King  and  Liberals, 458;   Progress  party  and  its   program, 458;   Representatives  oppose King's  army  reform,  459;  conflict between  King  and  Chamber,  461; ministerial  concessions  in   foreign policy,   461;   Bismarck's  first  ministry and   policy,   461;   "notification   " system,  463;  opposition  to  Bismarck's foreign   policy,   464;   refuses to   accept   work  of   Congress  of Princes,  465;   duchies  crisis,  466, 798;  Bismarck's  diplomacy,  467; Gastein  Convention,  469;  takes

874

Prussia - Continued.

Schleswig,  469;  Austro-Prussian War,  470,  801;  Confederation  dissolved, 471;   heads  new  union,  471; annexes  Schleswig  and  Holstein, 472;  treaty  of   Prague,  472;   impression produced  by   her  policy.   473; formation  of  North  German  Confederation, 473;   organization  and government,  474;  Franco-Prussian War,  482;  Bismarck  s  Economic Council,  500;   Bismarck  resigns,  505; Caprivi  resigns  prime-ministership, 508;   Prussia  in   Holy   Alliance,  748; Polish  question,  768;  Quadruple Alliance,  769;   Miinchengraetz  interview, 770;   absolutist  alliance,  771; Cracow  affair,  776;  Swiss  affair, 777;  revolution  of   '48   and  restoration, 780;   refugees,  781;   Austria triumphs  over,  781;   King  confers with  Schwartzenberg  at  Olmutz, 783;   recognition  of   French  Empire, 783;  increasing  'Strength  of,   788; leads  European  policy,  789;   refuses to   join   in   Crimean  War,   789;   refuses to   join   in   Italian  War,   794;   action  in Polish  affairs,  797;  alliance  with Italy, 800   ;latent  conflict  with  France, 804;   Triple  Alliance,  805;   FrancoPrussian  War  declared,  807;   London and  Frankfort  treaties,  817;   foreign policy   and  armed  camps,  819;   holds predominance,  821;   political  evolution of,   842.

Prussian  Union,  397.

Psara,  650.

Pulpit  Paragraph,  493.

## Quadruple  Alliance,  770. Quanta  Cura  (Encyclical),  699.

Radetzky,  Austrian  general-in-chief, leads  Austrian  forces  in   the   Italian revolution  of  1848,  340;  defeats rebels  and  sets  up  a  military government,  344  ; in   Civil  War,   416. Radicals,  in  England:  agitation  in 1816,  27;   Spafield,  29;  program,  29; "   Peterloo,"  30;   "Gag  Laws,"  31; Cato  Street  conspiracy,  31;  economic reforms  instituted  by   Place  and Hume,  32;   Chartist  agitation,  51; Workingmen's  Parliament,  O'Connor and   Lovett,  53;   desert  the   Melbourne ministry,  57!   joined  by federation  of  workingmen  for  extension of   suffrage,  65;   Disraeli's

Radicals,  in   England  -   Continued early   sympathy  with,  75;  evolution of   igth   century,  99.  In  France, 21 1 ;   join   patriots,  213;  the  Boulanger  crisis,  213;   first  radical  ministry, 220;   present  program,  221.  In Switzerland,  262;  National  Verein, 264;  victory  over  Catholics,  268; reorganize  Switzerland,  268.  In Spain,  312.   In   Germany,  388;   Offenburg  Assembly,  390.  In  Servia, 660.  In  Bulgaria,  666.  See  also under  Political  Evolution  of   Europe, 837.

"   Rallied"  Catholics  (France),  218. Ratazzi,  Italian  minister,  leader  of Left  Centre,  349;  second  Garibaldi expedition,  357;   failure  of   his   foreign policy,   359;   opposition  to  the Consorteria,  361.

Reform  Bills  (England),  act  of   1832, 37;   its   effect  on  political  conditions, 41,   838;   act  of   1867,   65;   its   effect on  political  conditions,  69;   reform of   1885,   82.

Refugees,  770,  781.

Reschid  Pasha,  Grand  Vizier  of   Ottoman Empire,  623   ;   reforms,  624   ; struggle  with  Riza,  624,

Reuter,  Fritz  (Prussia),  388.

Revolution  of  1830,  in   France,  130  ; in  Belgium,  233;   in   Netherlands, 234;   influence  in   Switzerland,  262; makes  first  break  in   European  alliance, 761   ;   effect  in   Europe,  764; political  evolution  of   Europe,  839. Revolution  of  1848,  779;  revolution- ary parties   during,  725;  effects  on political  evolution  of   Europe,  840; influence  on  Chartist  agitation  in England,  54;   influence  on  Young Ireland,  62;   in   France,  156;   in   Belgium, 248;   in   Italy,   339;   in   Austria, 341,413;  in   Germany,  390;   in   Prussia, 442;   in   Hungary,  414   ; in   the Church,  696.

Rhigas,  Greek  patriot,  649,   footnote. Ribot,  French  prime  minister,  220.

Richelieu,  Duke  of,   French  prime minister,  117  ;   president  of   French Chamber,  117;  resigns,  121;  prime minister,  121  ;   supported  by   Russia, 751.

Rights  of   Man  Society,  137,  723;   its program,  140;  social  revolutionary agitation,  159.

Rileief,  execution  of,   585. Risorgimento,  336,   694.

Ristitch,  president  of  Servian  regency, 660;   prime   minister,  661   ; regent  under  Alexander,  662.

Riza,  Ottoman  reformer,  struggle with  Reschid,  624.

Rochebouet,  French  prime  minister, forms  a   "   business  ministry,"  207. Rotteck,  381;   suspended,  389.

Roman  Bank  Scandal,  370.

Romaic,  Hellenic  national  awakening, 649.

Roman  Expedition,  166,   345.

Roman  Republic  established,  343,

Roman  Question,  355,  796.

Rome,  annexation  to  the  kingdom  of Italy,  351,  358   ;   secularization  of Church  property,  362;  made  capital of   kingdom  of   Italy,   362.

Rosa,  Martinez  de  la,   Spanish  Liberal minister  under  Christina,  297; decides  to  grant  a  new  constitution, 297.

Rosebery,  Lord,  succeeds  Gladstone as  prime  minister,  93;  projected program,  94,  96;   parish  councils, 94;  progressive  inheritance  tax,  95; fall   of   the   ministry  through  Liberal dissensions,  96.

Rouher,  French  prime  minister,  rivalry with   Ollivier,  178   ;   warlike policy,  179  ;   dismissed  by   Napoleon, 181.

Roumelia,  Eastern  organization  and government  of,   667   ;   union  with Bulgaria,  667.

Roumania,  revolution  of  1848,  416   ; "   Roumania  Irredenta,"  551,  647; Greek  insurrection,  619 ;   at   Confress   of   Berlin,  634;   formation  of tate  of,   642;   results  of   union,  643; Prince's  conflicts  with  Assembly, 643,   coup   d"  Statt   643;   land  reform, 644   ;   constitutional  monarchy,  644   ; parties,  645;   joins  Russia  against Ottoman  Empire,  646;  receives Dobrudsha  in   exchange  for  Bessarabia, 647   ;   officially  recognised  as independent  kingdom,  647   ;   work of   liberal  ministries,  648   ;   prosperity, 648.

Rouvier,  French  prime  minister,  213. Royal  Volunteers  (Spain),  294.

Royer-Collard,  French  Liberal  orator, defines  theory   of   royal   supremacy, 117   ;   press   law   of   1819,   120.

Rudini,  di,   Italian  leader  of   Right, prime  minister,  370;  opposition  to Crispi,  372;  second  ministry,  372.

Russell,  Lord  John,  English  minister, electoral  reform  of   '32,   35; prime  minister,  continues  Peel's policy,  62;   second  ministry  deserted by   Adullamites,  65.

Russia,  settlements  of   1815,  8;   aids Austria  in  Hungarian  war,  419  ; Bismarck's  diplomacy,  467   ;   territorial and   social  conditions  in   1814, 578   ;   government,  581   ;   death  of Alexander  I.,   585;   secret  societies, 585   ;   revolt  of   Decabrists,  585;   execution of   Pestel  and   Rileiet,  585   ; third  section  of   Chancellery,  586   ; Polish  insurrection,  586 ;  under Nicholas  I.,   588   ;   literature,  588   ; religious  persecutions,  589 ;   process of   Russianizing  western  provinces, 589;   Crimean  war  and  its   effects in,   590;   death  of   Nicholas  and fall   of   his   system,  590   ;   liberal  reaction under  Alexander  II.,   590; intelliguenzia,  westerners,  and  nationalists, 590;   Alexander's  first  reforms, 591   ;   emancipation  of   serfs, 591;  effects  of   the   land  reform,  595; liberal  reforms,  596;   Polish  insurrection of   1863,   597   ;   Polish  national movement  crushed,  600  ; Church  troubles,  602  ;   Concordat abrogated,  602;   radical  land  reform, 603;   return  to  absolutism,  603;   opposition parties,   605   ;   Karakosof's attempt  against  the  Tsar,  606;  So'cialists,  606;   Terrorists,  607;   Alexander III.'s   reign,   608;   autocratic system  revived,  609 ;   censorship of  press,  609;   financial  measures, 610;  Russification,  611;  Nicholas II. 's   financial  measures,  613;   coronation accident,  613   ;   autocratic system  threatened,  613   ;   protector of   Orthodox  in   Ottoman  Empire, 618;   sends  aid   to   Sultan,  622;   RussoTurkish  war,  633,   761;   Greek  politics, 654;   Free  Masons  forbidden, 719   ;   share  in   Holy   Alliance,  748; influence  in  Southern  Germany, Sardinia,  Spain,  and  Portugal,  750; change  in   Eastern  policy,  760   ;   Anglo-Russian protocol,   760;   peace  of Adrianople,  761;   Polish  Question, 768;   Miinchengraetz  interview,  770; absolutist  alliance,  771  ;   recognition of   French  Empire,  783;   Nicholas wishes  to  settle  Eastern  Question, 784 ;   peaceful  policy,  788   ;   Poiish affairs,  797   ;   attitude  in   France*

Russia - Continued.

Prussian  war,  813;   denounces  treaty of   '56,   816   ;   public   opinion  hostile to   Germany,  821;   Alliance  of   three Emperors,  821  ;   Berlin  Congress, 826   ;   understanding  with  France, 828   ;   Skiernevice  interview,  828  ; predominant  in   the  East,  831;   place in   armed  peace,  831;   political  evolution of,   843;   Church,  concordat abrogated  and  monastic  bodies suppressed,  602.

Russo-Turkish  War,  761.  See  also under  Ottoman  Empire,  633.

Sadowa,  Prussia  defeats  Austria,  471, 801.

Sagasta,  leader  of   Spanish  Progressists, 312;   leader  of   Liberals,  317; unites  with  Martinez  Campos  in the  government,  318;   weakens  position of   his  ministry  by   economies and  new  taxes,  318.

Saldanha,  Portuguese  Chartist  minister, leader  of   Regeneradors^  323;   his government,  323.

Salmeron,  second  president  of   Spanish Republic,  314;  retires  from  office, 314;   leader  of   Progressists,  318.

Salisbury,  English  prime  minister, 84;   defeated  by   Home  Rulers,  85; second  ministry,  86;   Irish  policy,  88; Irish  leaders  imprisoned,  88;   Land Purchase  Act,  88;   county  administration reform,   88;   third  ministry, 96;   foreign  policy,   social  and  industrial reforms,  97.

Salonica,  French  and  English  consuls assassinated  at,   631.

Santa  Rosa,  Count  of,   leader  of   Sardinian rebellion,  331   ;   minister  of war,  332.

San  Stefano,  peace  of,   826.

Saragossa,  sacking  of  monasteries and  massacre  of   monks  by   Spanish Progressists,  299.

Sardinia -  Continued.

poleon  III.  to  maintain  Ottoman Empire  against  Russia,  626  ;   Russian influence,  750;  customs  union with  Tuscany  and  Pope,  777  ;   restoration after   revolution  of   1848, 780;   Cavour's  policy,  788   ;   alliance with  France,  793  ;   political  evolution of,   841.

Sarnerbund,  264.

Saussier,  candidate  for  presidency  of France,  214.

Saroy,  offered  as  reward  to   France, 793;  annexed  by   France,  796. Saxe-Coburg,  policy  of,   765.

Saxe-Weimar,  constitution  under  Germanic Confederation,  379;   Wartburg   festival,  384;   press  censorship established,  384.

Saxony,  partition  of,   at   Congress  of Vienna,  7;   government  under  Germanic Confederation,  378;   constitution granted,  387;  King   rejects election  of   Prussian  King  as  Emperor, 395;   Republican  rising,   396   ; Prussian  alliance,  396;   joins   Austria against   Prussia,  471.

Scharnhorst,  military  reform  in   Prussia, 427.

Schleswig-Holstein  Crisis,  466,  798. See  also  under  Denmark,  567. School  Law  (Belgium),  250.

Scotland,  unreformed  electoral  system, 18;   church,  20;  prosecution  of workingmen's  unions,  51;   federation of   trade  unions,  64;   supports Liberal  party  and  Home  Rule,  87; socialism,  90;  Socialist  Labour party,  92. Schwartzenberg,  Austrian  prime  minister, 419  ;   one  of   the  masters  of European  policy,  764   ;   part   in   restoration, 780   ;   policy   toward  Prussia, 782   ;   confers  with  King   of Prussia  at   Olmtitz,  783.

Schweidnitz  Affair,  446.

Seasons  Society,  organizes  insurrection, 139;   aims  at  social  reform, 141;   last  Republican  insurrection, 144;  remnant  of   Republican  party,

150. Sebastopol,  siege   of,   790.

Sedan,  surrender  of   Napoleon  III., 815.

Sepoy  Rebellion,  leads  to  suppression of   India  Company,  64-

September,  Convention,  357,  799; Laws  of,   139.

Sardinia,  gains  Genoa,  326;   the  restoration, 327;   resists  Austrian  influence, 328;   military  revolution  of 1821,  331;   King  encourages  movement for   national  unity,   337;   revolution of   1848,   340   ;   Constitutional Statute,  340;  unites  with  Lombardo-  j Venetian  kingdom,  344;  army  defeated by   Austria,  344;  effects  of   the revolution,  346;   government  of   Victor Emmanuel,  347;   Siccardi  laws, 348;   leagues  with  England  and  Nation

Septennate,  French  law  of,   200;   German law   of   (military),   495.

Socialists -  Continued.

Serrano,  Spanish  general,  with  Prim heads  the  provisional  government of   1868,   310;  receives  the  regency from  the  Cortes,  311;  puts  dovrii Carlist  insurrection,  311;  struggle with  the  clergy,  311;  appointed president  of   the  Republic,  314;   his dictatorship  unsatisfactory  to   both parties,  315;  offers  no  resistance  to restoration  of   Alphonso,  315.

Seven  Professors,  affair  of,   389. Siccardi  laws,  348.

Servia,  revolution  of   1848,415;  Omladina,  551;  enters  Bulgarian  war, 632;   Congress  of   Berlin,  634;   formation of   principality,  657;   work of   emancipation,  657;   Austrian  influence, 657;   revolt  in,   657;   KaraGeorges,  657;   Milosh  Obrenowitch becomes  prince,  658;  government, 658;  constitution  of  1837,  658; Michael's  policy,  659;  army  reorganized, 659;   under  constitutional system,   659;   constitution  of 1869,   660;   Liberal  government,  661; war  against  Turkey,  661;   peace  of Berlin,  661;  Austrian  party,  661; General  Union,  661;  Radicals  demand revision  of   constitution,  661; Radical  insurrection,  662;  centralized administration,  662;  war against  Bulgaria,  662;   constitution of   1888,   662;   Milan  abdicates,  662; Ristitch  regent  under  Alexander, 662;   Alexander's  coups,  662;  con-   ! stitution  of   '69   restored,  663;   provisional system,   663.

Sicily,  demands  independence,  331; begins  revolution  of   1848,   339;  war against  Neapolitan  rule,  342;   Garibaldi's expedition,  354;   Garibaldi's second  expedition,  357;  the  Mafia, 360;   the   Socialists  and  the  bread riots,   371.

Siebenerconcordat,  263.

Silesia,  Czech  national  opposition, 410;   Panslamsm  in,   410;  revolution of   1848,   414.

Simon,  Jules,  French  minister,  on revolution  of  1848,  159;  ministry, 205;   dismissed,  206;   joined   International, 728.

Snell,  Swiss  Republican,  263.

Skiernevice,  interview  at,   829.

Socialists,  schools  of,   721;  theories in   opposition  to  organization  of society,  721;  new  policy,  722;   Communist parties,   723;   Alliance  of Communists,  723;  Fraternity,  726; International,  727;  work  of   the  annual congresses,  728;   Marx's  manifesto, 730;   formation  of   platform in   Germany,  731;  Lassalle,  731; General  Union  of  German  Workingmen,  732;  Anarchists,  735;   National Socialist   parties,   737;   policy of   revolutionary  parties,  739;  International Socialist  Congresses, 743;   in   political  revolution  of   Europe, 839,   844.  In   England:  formation of   parties,  90;   "   League  for   Nationalization of   the  Land,"  "League for   Restitution  of   the   Land,"  "Social Democratic  Federation,"  90; Tom  Mann  and  John  Burns,  92; Socialist  Labour  party,  92;   first  to sit  in   Parliament,  93;  socialistic ideas  gain   ground,  961.   In   France: formation  of   Communist-Socialist party,  140;  aims  of   the  party,  141; Louis  Blanc,  141;  continued  agitation for   social  reform,  150;  after the  Revolution  of   1848,   159;   Rights of   Labour,  160;   national  workshops established,  160;   "   Organization  of Labour,"  160;  government  committee on   labouring  classes,  160;   slight representation  in   Constituent  Assembly, 162;   twice  attempt  new revolution,  162;   "Days  of  June," 163;   party  stamped  out,  164;  remnants gathered  into  Assembly  of 1849,  166;  mingle  with  Radical party,  183;  revival  of,   217;   Marxists and   Possibilists,  217;   "   Social Republic,"  217;   Socialist  Congress of  1892,  217;  Paris  Labour  Exchange closed,  218;   become  a   purely political  party,  221.  In   Netherlands, 242.   In   Belgium,  255.   In Switzerland,  283;  Griitli  Union, 283;   Wohlgemuth  Case,  283.  In Germany,  479;  Socialist  Workingman's  Party,  486;  repression  of, 496;   "   Socialists  of   the   chair,"  498; "   State  Socialists"  and  "   Christian Socialists,"  501;  revival,  506;   success in   elections  of   '93,   5°9I   Emperor's  struggle  against,  509.  In Austria:  demonstration  by,  537; crushed,  546;   social  democratic  industrial party,   548.   In   Sweden, 559;   in   Norway,  565;  in   Russia,

Socialists -   Continued.

Church,  Leo  XIII.  issues  Encyclical

606;  in  Roumania,  647;  in  the

Humanum  Genus  against,  715.

Sonderbund,  267,   778.

Solferino,  battle  of,   351,  795.

Soult,  French  prime  minister,  144;

Spafield,  29.

Eastern  Question,  774.

Spain,  condition  in   1814,   286;  restoration of   1814,   absolute  king brought  back  by   English  army, 289;   effects  of   the   wars,  290;  revolution of   1820  by   the   officers  of   the army  restores  the  constitution of  1812,  290;   institution  of   junta and  pronunciamiento,  291 ;   organization of   parties  and  Cortes  of 1820,   292;   financial  difficulties,  292; France  restores  the  absolutist  government, 293;   "   Royal  Volunteers," 294;  permanent  results  of   the  revolution, 294;   troubles  in   the   government, 295;   war  of   the   succession, 295;   Ferdinand  decrees  his  daughter Isabella  his   successor,  296;   her mother,  Christina,  takes  the  regency, 296;   Christina  gains   the support  of  the  Liberals,  297;   Carlists  and  Christinas,  297;  government attempts  administrative  reforms, 297;   Christina  promulgates the   Statute  of   1834,   by   which  Spain becomes  a  constitutional  monarchy, 297;   subsequent  agitatioa  in political  life,   298;   Mendizabal  attempts to   pay   off   the   national  debt, 299;  the  Queen  is   forced  by   Progressists to  promulgate  the  constitution of   1812,   300;   the   Constitution of   1837,   300;  the  Carlist  war, 300;  composition  and  tactics  of   the two  armies,  301;  peace  made  at Convention  of  Vergara,  302;  military dictatorship  of   Espartero  and of   Narvaez,  303;  Constitution  of 1845,   304;  the  Spanish  marriages, 304,  775;  the  system  of   dictatorship, 304;   financial  regulations made  by   the  Moderates,  304;   Moderates adopt   an  absolutist  policy, 305;  period  of   reaction  throughout Europe,  305;  Concordat  of  1851, 305;  constitutional  reform  projects bring   about  the  revolution  of   1854, 306;  O'Donnell's  Liberal  Union, 306;   government  of   Espartero  and O'Donnell,  307;  Progressist  restotution

Spain - Continued.

ration,  307;   O'Donnell  restores  the Constitution  cf   1845,  with  the  Additional Act,   307;   the   Narvaez  ministry restores  the   former  system, 307;  O'Donnell's  second  ministry and  policy,  308;   transformation  of parties  and  public  opinion,  308; series  of   insurrections  and  revolution of   1868,   309;   Isabella  flees and  provisional  coalition  government set   up   at   Madrid,  310;  manifesto proclaims  principles  of   the new  system,  310;  clergy  fight against  religious  liberty  and  the revolutionary  government,  311;  coalition breaks  up   over  choice  of   a King,  311;   Amadeo,  Duke  of   Aosta, chosen,  311;   difficulties  of   his   government, 312;   Isabella  abdicates  in favour  of   her  son  Alphonso,  who is   supported  by   a   Moderate-Unionist coalition,  312;   the   Radical  government is   opposed  by   clergy  and army  officers  (see   under  Hidalgo], 313;   Amadeo  abdicates,  313;   Cortes proclaims  a   Republic,  313;   Republican party   divides,  313;   Federalist coup  d'etat,  313;   Cantonist  revolt, 313;   Pi   y   Margall,  Salmeron,  Castelar,   314;  army  once  more  controls the  government  through  Pavia's coup   d'etat,  314;   Serrano  appointed president,  314;  second  Carlist  war, 314;  restoration  of   Alphonso,  315; his  ministry,  315;  conciliates  the Pope,  315;  end  of  second  Carlist war,  316;   constitution  of   1876,   316; constitutional  guarantees  restored, but  decrees  of  dictatorship  not abrogated,  316;  the  constitutional monarchy,  317;  reorganization  of parties,  317;  death  of  Alphonso XII.,   and  regency  of   Maria  Christina, 318;   universal  suffrage  established, 318;   internal  and   external troubles,  318-19;  present  condition of   Spain,  319;  Russian  influence in,   750;  intervention  in,   769;   Quad, ruple  Alliance,  770;  political  evolution of,   844.   Church:  opposed to   liberal  system,  292;   Mendizabal suppresses  religious  houses,  299; religious  regulations  under  the Constitution  of   1837,   360;   Concordat of   1851,   305;  abolition  of   Church jurisdiction  and  sale  of  Church property  sanctioned  by   Pope,  305; tion istry

Spain   -   Continued.

religious  liberty  established  by revolution  of   1868,   310;  clergy   fight against  religious  liberty,  311;  restoration ministry   conciliates  the Pope,  315;   Church  under  constitution of   1876,   316.

Spanish  Liberals,  280;  under  Christina, 297;   divisions,  298;   desert Moderates,  305;  present  condition,

Spanish  Marriages,  304,  775.

Spezzia,  650.

Speranski,  581.

Stambouloff,   Bulgarian    prime    minister, 668;   assassinated,  669.

State  of   Good  Feeling,  775.

Stang,    Norwegian    prime    minister, 565.

States  of   the   Church,  the  restoration in,    327;    revolution    of     1831,     333; government,  334;   annexed   to   the kingdom  of   Italy,  351;  attacked  by Garibaldi,  354.

Steen,   Norwegian     prime     minister, 565.

Statute  of   1834   (Spain),  297.

Stein,  Baron  vom,  Prussian  minister, 375;  reforms,  424.

St.   Petersburg,  Conference  of,   760. St.   Simon,  French  Socialist,  721. Stoecker,  501,  504.

St.   Arnaud,  French  minister  of   war, 170.

Stourdza,   university   persecution   in Germany,    384;     hospodar   of     Moldavia, 641;   Roumanian  prime   minister, 648.

Strauss,  in   the   Zurich  affray,  266.

Straits  Convention,  623,   775.

Strossmayer,  at   Vatican  Council,  704; received  by   Leo  XIII.,  715;  attempt to   unite    orthodox   churches    into Catholic  unity,  715.

Surlet   de    Chokier,  Belgian   Regent, 235Suter,  276.

Sverdrup,  Norwegian  prime  minister, 563-

Syllabus,  701;   publication   of,   forbidden by   French  government,  178.

Sverdrup,  John,  Norwegian    pastor, 564.

Syria,   claimed  by   Mehemet-Ali,  622; assigned  to    him,   622;     restored   to Sultan  by   Europe,  623.

Sweden,    cession     of     Pomerania     to Prussia,  and   union   with    Norway,

Swede  n  - Continued.

Switzerland,  settlements  of  1815,  8; condition  in   1814,   257;   Act   of   Mediation, 258;   restoration,  259;   Alexander of   Russia  opposes  restoration of   old   regime   (Laharpe  and   Jomini), 259;   Pact  of   1815,   260;   constitution of   the   cantons,  260;   "   Conclusum," 262;  regeneration,  262;  Radical party,  262;  Snell's  "   Memorial  of Kussnach,"  263:   Siebenerconcordat, 263;   Sarnerbund,  264;   confused  political life,   264;   local  conflicts,  265; Church  troubles,  265,  281;  labour reforms,  283;  Wohlgemuth  Case, 283;  Griitli  Union,  283;  political evolution  of,   844   ;   Church:  trouble with  Pope  over  Articles  of   Baden, 265;   religious  freedom  under  Federal Constitution  of   1848,   269.

7;  formation  of  Scandinavian States,  554;   Church,  555;  transformation of   constitution,  556;   reforms, 556;   transformation  of   Diet, 557;  parties,  557;  national  movement, 566.

Taaffe,  Austrian   prime  minister,  545. Tak,  Dutch  prime  minister,  243.

Talleyrand,  French  envoy  to   Congress of   Vienna,  5;   his   policy,  5;   secures defensive  alliance  with  Austria  and England,  6;   organizes  demonstration in   favour  of   Bourbons,  104;  retains his   office  under  restoration, in  ;   dismissed  by   Louis  XVIII., 117;   in   Orleanist  party,  127;  share in   settlement  of   Belgium,  767.

Tchernagora.    See  under  Montenegro. Teplitz  Interview,  771.

Test  Act,   repeal   of,   34,693.

Terrorists  (Russia),  607.

Thessaly,  revolt,  629;  Congress  of Berlin,  634;   commercial  prosperity, 648;   Hellenic  national  awakening, 649.

Thiers,  French  prime  minister,  a founder  of  the  Orleanist  party, 127   ;   draws  up  a  proclamation against  Charles  X.,  131;  brings Louis  Philippe  to   Paris,  131;  proclaims sovereignty  of   the   people, 132;   breaks  with  Guizot,  142;   his theory,  142;  compelled  to  resign, 143   ;   second  ministry,  144,;  policy, 145;  resigns,  145;  recalled,  157;   demands the   "necessary  liberties," 178;   action  during  Franco-Prussian

Thiers-  Continued.

war,  187,   189,   816;   elected  head  of government,  190;  policy,  190;  government, 194   ;   resigns,   197   ;   on Eastern  Question,  774  ;   action  in London  and  Frankfort  treaties,  817. Thorbecke,  Dutch  minister,  239.

"Three  Acres  and  a   Cow"  agitation (England),  85.

Tirard,  French  prime   minister,  214. Tisza,  Austrian  prime  minister,  543. Tolstoi,  Russian  minister  of   education 60?;   dismissed,  608;   recalled, 609.

Three  Emperors,  Alliance  of,   821. Three  F's  (Irish  Land),  78.

Tonquin  agitation,  211.

Trade  Unions  in  England:  Origin, 49,   50;   Chartist  agitation,  51;   break away  from  the  Chartist  movement, i)4;   build  up   central  organization, Council  of   the  Unions,  64,   65;   policy, 65;   legislation,   73;   Parliamentary Committee  of   the,   90;   change in  character,  91;   London  dock strike,  92;   Tom  Mann  and  John Burns,  92;   fund  for  sending  members to   Parliament,  95.   In   France forbidden  in   1815, 108 ; Napoleon  III. permits  unions,  177.

Tortosa,  Compact  of,   311.

Transylvania,  incorporation  with Hungary,  409.

Tripolitza,  blockade  of,   650.

Tricoupis,  Greek  prime  minister,  656. Triple  Alliance,  827.

Trochu,  military  governor  of   Paris, 187.

Troppau,  Congress  of,   755.

Turkey.     See  under  Ottoman  Empire. Turkish  War,  824.

Tugendbund,  384.

Tuscany,  given  back  to   Austrian  rule, 326;  the  restoration,  327;  Grand Duke  encourages  movement  for national  unity,  337  ;   Duke  grants liberal  reforms,  338;   Duke  grants a  con:  titution,  340;  revolution  of 1848,  341  ;   Republic  proclaimed, 344;  restoration,  345;   becomes  part of   the  kingdom  of   Italy,   351;  customs union   with   Sardinia  and   Pope, 777-

Ultras,  or  Ultra-royalists  (France), opposed  to  Charts,  115  ;   majority in   Chamber  of  1815,  Ultra  ministers,ii7;  conflict  with  Louis  XVIII.,

Ultras -  Continued.

118;   gain   control  in   1820,  122;   legislation and   policy   of,   123   ;   ministry of,   under  Polignac,  126.

Ultramontanes,  in   France,  124,  149. See   also   under  Church  and  Catholic Parties.

United  Landtag,  390,  440. Unkiar-Skelessi,  treaty  of,   622,   770.

Vatican  Council,  704,   806.

Venetia, ceded  to   Austria  by   Congress of   Vienna,  6;   revolution  of   1848, 339   ;   Lombardo-Venetian  kingdom unites  with  Sardinia  for  independence, 344;   reconquered  by   Austria, 344;   becomes  part  of   the  kingdom of   Italy,   351,   357.   See  also  under Austria,  523.

Vergara,  Convention  of,   ends  the Carlist  war,  303.

Verona,  Congress  of,   758.

Vichnegradzky,  Russian  financier,

610.

Victor  Emmanuel,  son  of  Charles Albert,  makes  peace  with  Austria in   1849,   344;   his   liberal  government, 347.  See  also  under  Italy.

Victoria,  becomes  Queen  of   England, 43;  parliamentary  character  of   her reign,  43;  proclaimed  Empress  of India,  76.

Vienna,  Campaign,  418;  Conference of,   385;   Congress  of,   4;   questions to   be   settled  at,  5;   France's  position at,   5;   territorial  settlements at,   6;   decisions  regarding  France after  the  Hundred  Days,  7;   final act  of,   7;   work  of,   8;   peace  of,   799. Villafranca,  interview  of,   796.

Villele,  French  prime  minister,  121; opposition  to   Chamber, 125;  resigns, 125.

Vorparlament,  391.

Waddington,  French  prime  minister. 208.

Waldeck     Rousseau,    candidate     for presidency  of   France,  220.

Wartburg  Festival,  384.

Wallachia,     Napoleon      III.     secures autonomy  for,   626;   condition  up   to 1856,  640;   revolution    of    1848,   641; merged   in   state  of   Roumania,  642. Wangenheim,  386.

Wealth,  increase  of,   679.

Wekerle,  Austrian    prime    minister,

550.

Welcker,  381;   suspended,  389.

Wellington,  Duke  of,   ministry,  34; carries  Catholic  Emancipation,  34; attitude  on  Parliamentary  reform, 35;  entrusted  with  defence  of   London, 55.

Westphalia,  forms  part  of  Prussian indemnity,  7.

White  Terror,  116.

Wielopolski,  Polish  minister,  598.

William  I.,   King   of   Prussia,  unpopular as   absolutist  leader,  442;   becomes Lieutenant,  later  Regent, 450;   becomes  King,  455;  army  reform, 455;   government  of, 456;   head of   army,  457;  wins  confidence  of Liberals,  458   ;   doctrine  of   divine right,  458;   conflict  with  Liberals, 458;   crowned  Emperor,  482;   fidelity to   Bismarck,  502;   increases  Prussia's strength,  788   ;   declaration  of war  with  France,  807;   death,  502.

881 William  IV.,  King  of   England,  36; tries  to  take  ministers  of   his   own choosing,  43;   succeeded  by   Victoria,

Willich,  726.

43Windischgraetz,  Austrian  commander during  civil  war,  416;   in   Hungarian war,  419;  prime   minister,  548.

Wohlgemuth  Case,  283.

Wurtemburg,  constitution  under  Germanic Confederation,  379;   constitutional opposition  in,   386;   decrees  of 1832,  388;  national  manifestation, 390;   King   rejects  election  of   Prussian King   as   Emperor,  395;   in   Zollverein,  453;   joins   Austria  against Prussia,  471,  783   ;   supported  by Russia,  751.

Wurzburg  Conference,  465,   696.

Young  Europe,  720.

Ypsilanti,    Greek    insurrection,    619, 651,   757;   "arch-strategist,"  651.

William  I.,   King   of   Netherlands,  230; revolution  of   1830,   234;  refuses  to accept  settlements  of   London  Conference and   renews  war,  238;   abdicates, 238.

Zach,  Austrian  prime  minister,  421; Concordat  of  1855  and  fall  of   Josephism,  422. Zollverein,  452.

Zorilla,  Ruy,   leader  of   Spanish  Radicals, 312;   leader  of   Progressists, 318.

William  II.,   King   of   Netherlands,  239. William  III.,  King  of   Netherlands, 244.

318. Zurich,  treaty  of,   796   ;   affray   of,   265. Zumalacarregui,  organizes  the  first Carlist  army  in  Navarre,  301;   besieges Bilbao   and   is   killed,   302.

BILLING  AND   SONS,    LTD.,    PRINTERS,   GUILDFORD.

William  II.,   Emperor  of  Germany, 503;   character,  opinions,  and  policy, 503;  rupture  with  Bismarck,  505; the  "New  Course,"  505;  struggle against  socialists,  509.